  
  
  
  
  
IF JESUS ASKED A LOT OF QUESTIONS, SHOULD CHRISTIANS?:  
HOW JESUS’S RHETORIC INFORMS OUR DISCIPLESHIP PRACTICES  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
A THESIS PRESENTED TO THE FACULTY   
  
OF NORTHERN BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY  
  
LISLE, IL  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT   
  
OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE  
  
DOCTOR OF MINISTRY  
  
  
  
  
  
  
BY  
  
NIKA SPAULDING  
MARCH, 2025  
  
  


  
  
  
  
APPROVAL FORM  
  
  
IF JESUS ASKED A LOT OF QUESTIONS: SHOULD CHRISTIANS?:  
HOW JESUS’S RHETORICAL USE OF QUESTIONS INFORMS OUR DISCIPLESHIP  
PRACTICES  
  
  
  
  
NIKA SPAULDING  
  
  
Approved by:  
  
______________________________ Supervisor Dr. Scot McKnight   
  
______________________________ Second Reader Dr. Sandra Glahn   
  
______________________________ Dean of Academic Affairs  
  
__________________________________________  
Date  
  
  
  
  


  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Copyright © 2025 Nika Spaulding  
All Rights Reserved  
  
  


  
  
  
 CONTENTS  
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS…………………………………………………………….                v  
  
ABSTRACT…………………………………………………………………………….              vi   
  
Chapters:  
  
1.   INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………...                1  
2.    DISCIPLESHIP AS IDENTITY FORMATION……………………………….              13  
3.   JESUS’S RHETORICAL SOURCES THAT INFORM HIS QUESTION-   
ASKING PRACTICE………………………………………………………….               40  
  
4.   SAMPLE OF JESUS’S QUESTIONS…………………………………………              62  
5.   PROJECT DESIGN AND RESULTS………………………………………….              72  
6.   THEOLOGICAL CONCLUSIONS……………………………………………              87  
Appendices:  
A.   GUIDELINES AND PROJECT PROTOCOLS……………………………….             100  
B.   LIST OF QUESTIONS USED IN THE PROJECT……………………………             102  
C.   LIKERT SCALE SURVEY QUESTIONS…………………………………….             105  
BIBLIOGRAPHY…………………………………………………………………….              106  
  
  
  
  
  
  


  
  
v 
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
  
I have two missions in life: convince people that God loves them and try to be the greatest Aunt  
in the world. When a project like this comes along that allows me to chase both simultaneously, I  
am grateful. Jayden, Nixon, and AJ, you are the greatest loves of my life. I could not love you  
more if I tried, and I wrote this thesis for you. I want a better world for you. God loves you more  
than you can fathom. If you’re not sure, just ask. Always ask. Questions fertilize the ground for  
blossoms of success and joy. Cheering you three on, always.   
  
Flanked always on my side like two sentries ready to go to war with me (or to dinner)—Robin  
and Alex—you are my constant encouragement, joy, and sounding boards. Thank you. Whatever  
modicum of success I might achieve is in direct proportion to the love you have given me.   
  
Mom, Jerry, Cody, and Ashley, I love us. Thank you for being the family I would have chosen if  
I could.  
  
To both sets of surrogate parents—Nick & Lynda and John & Dianne—every kid should have  
bonus adults that love, support, and encourage her.    
  
Carter, Chelsea, Tashara, Lynelle, Mario, Kelsey, Ellie, The Riggs, Kat, Kelley, and Rebecca, you  
have been steady anchors in a vast sea of waves. This thesis survived choppy waters because of  
your friendship.   
  
To the Malones, Andrew asked a lot of questions, and that’s one of the things I loved most about  
him. It is a gift to know you all and to be counted among your friends.   
  
To the men and women of SJOC who took part in this project, I am deeply grateful for your  
participation, but more so for your wisdom and encouragement. You are the best of humanity.  
Keep asking and answering questions.  
  
Corrie, you are the best dog, the most loyal companion.   
  
Thank you, Drs. Scot McKnight and Sandra “Godmother” Glahn, for your feedback and  
encouragement. I am striving to grab your cloaks when God calls you home.   
  
Finally, for anyone who reads this, if nobody has told you today that they love you, I do. But,  
way more importantly, God does.   
  
  
  
  
  


  
  
vi  
ABSTRACT  
  
This thesis examines the rhetorical impact of Jesus's use of question-asking on his audience,  
particularly in the context of discipleship as a process of identity formation. By analyzing the  
way Jesus employed questions to shape his followers into deeper worshippers, I argue that  
modern discipleship should model this approach. Through a combination of biblical analysis and  
theoretical research, I demonstrate that Jesus's questions were not merely teaching tools but  
pivotal in guiding individuals toward transformative spiritual growth. To further explore this  
concept, I designed an experimental project that assessed the effect of open-ended questions on  
participants' identities in relation to God, themselves, and others. The results of the experiment  
showed measurable improvements in participants' understanding and engagement with these key  
areas. In conclusion, I advocate for churches to embrace and reward curiosity, emphasizing the  
need for ministries to incorporate more open-ended, thought-provoking questions into their  
practices for fostering deeper spiritual development.  
  
  
  
  
  


  
  
CHAPTER 1  
  
INTRODUCTION:  
  
ASK BETTER QUESTIONS: QUESTION ASKING AND ANSWERING IN THE  
DISCIPLESHIP PROCESS FORMS IDENTITIES  
  
  
Statement of Ministry Issue  
    
On a summer road trip with two parishioners, I asked them a question I have asked  
churchgoers through the years: “What is discipleship?” Usually, the responses include iterations  
of “It’s a program on Wednesday nights” or “when one person mentors another like Barnabas did  
for Paul who did for Timothy.” Sometimes I hear “It’s the ability to read your Bible and pray” or  
“It’s for super-duper Christians.” My car trip companions—both of whom have been in churches  
from their diaper days—responded in a similar same vein. While programs, mentorship, and  
spiritual disciplines play a part in the discipleship process, they fall short of fully defining this  
term that Jesus commissions all (not just the brawny believers) of his followers to obey. The two  
women accompanying me had considerable biblical and theological knowledge and have been  
crawling and walking through pews for a lifetime. Why, then, are their definitions of discipleship  
so anemic—like most others? I blame theologians like me. “Go and make disciples” remains the  
clarion call of Christians even after two millennia. Maybe we should be clearer on what this  
means and then discuss effective ways of fulfilling that calling. This thesis will attempt to do just  
that.   
While the emphasis of this thesis will focus on question-asking as a rhetorical strategy for  
discipleship, we must first define our terms. Without a shared understanding of the definitions,  
we would be lost. I will argue discipleship is identity formation. The process of discipleship asks  
and answers, “Who is God?,” “Who am I?,” “Who are others?,” and “How do these identities  


  
  
relate?” Discipleship is growing in the knowledge of the Trinity’s identity while simultaneously  
growing in the knowledge of self and neighbor. Undergirding this knowledge is the assumption  
that right knowledge will result in greater love. When one truly beholds God, love results.   
If discipleship is identity formation, how do we go about forming identities? Jesus, the  
model discipler, shows the way. When examining how Jesus discipled his followers, we see  
several methods employed: didactic teaching, demonstration of miracles, leading by example,  
and question-asking to name a few. Most of this thesis will focus on Jesus’s use of question- 
asking as a tactic for identity formation. We aim to answer a simple hypothesis: If Jesus asked a  
lot of questions, should we? I think so. After defining our terms, discussing the rhetorical impact  
of question-asking, and looking at Jesus’s example as a question asker, we will then discuss the  
results of a project designed to test the effectiveness of question-asking on identity formation.  
Participants in the project simply ask and answer open-ended, identity-forming questions.  
Looking at the results we demonstrate how asking questions—with no attendant teaching about  
the Bible or theology—resulted in greater clarity about God, the individual, and the individual’s  
conception of their neighbor. The final section of this thesis will consider theological conclusions  
derived from the research.   
  
Ministry Context  
  
In the fall of 2017, I walked on a stage in a rented room of a church in Oak Cliff, Dallas,  
Texas and uttered the words, “If nobody has told you today that they love you, we do. But, way  
more importantly, God does.” A church was born, and I was now their Resident Theologian. St  
Jude Oak Cliff started as a church plant out of the Presbyterian Church of America (PCA). The  
lead pastor, Martin Ban, and our lead elder, John Hawkins, came together to plant a church that  


  
  
focused on caring for the poor and teaching theology. Instead of the materially poor, God sent us  
the poor in Spirit.   
  
In our first year, the PCA gave us an ultimatum: either leave the PCA or stop having a  
woman teach from the stage on Sunday mornings. We opted to leave and expanded opportunities  
for women within St Jude. After leaving the denomination, we considered joining others that  
both allow women to preach/administer the sacraments and also encourage them to do so. In the  
end, we decided to remain an independent church. But while we left the PCA, we brought some  
of their traditions with us. For example, those who participate in the worship service wear stoles;  
we have a more liturgical order of worship; and we limited the offices to elder and minister of  
Word and Sacrament. Due to the departure from the PCA, though, we implemented some  
changes. A woman preached, a woman led sacraments, and that woman wore Nikes while doing  
so. As one person quipped, “St Jude is either the highest low church, or the lowest high church.”  
We liked that mixture.  
  
In 2019, a consultant guided us on a listening tour of our church which brought us data to  
support what we sensed among our body. We were the church for spiritual refugees. People came  
to St Jude limping from church hurt, mid- or post-deconstruction, and giving a last-ditch effort to  
the whole church enterprise. Over 60 percent of our congregants stated, “If St Jude did not exist,  
we would not attend church at all.” The leadership recognized the high stakes of caring for such  
a vulnerable group of people. To strategically care for the wounded, our church focused on  
justice, counseling-informed preaching, and theological classes.   
  
As the Resident Theologian, I had the privilege of designing, teaching, and leading all our  
theology courses. We called them “TAP” which stood for “Theology Automatic for the People."  
This was an homage to an REM album titled “Automatic for the People” which they named after  


  
  
a soul-food restaurant called Weaver D’s in Athens, Georgia. Dexter Weaver, the owner, came up  
with the slogan. 1  We wanted theology to be the same—accessible for the masses.   
  
Starting with a Trinity class in a roofing company’s office, I launched what would be  
seven years of weekly theology and Bible study courses. St Jude hosted them at that roofing  
company; in a Salvation Army cafeteria; in the basement of an old Dixie Cup factory; my living  
room; Martin’s living room; an old dentist’s office that we refurbished into a gathering space;  
and in an elder’s living room. I covered the gamut of topics. I taught courses on the Trinity,  
Essentials of the Faith, Justice, 1 Timothy, Advent, Amos, Attributes of God, Meta-narrative of  
the Bible, Bible Study Methodology, Role of Women, Gospel in the Margins, Hebrews, Jesus’s  
Biography, Jude, Romans, Sermon on the Mount, Textual Criticism, and Church History. Once  
during a class on how the first-century churches operated, I put on a Roman Centurion costume  
and gave roles to my students like “Gentile Father,” “House Slave,” and “Recent Jewish  
Convert.” In full Roman garb I read a letter I had crafted from miscellaneous writings of Paul. I  
stopped intermittently to ask how each person, in character, felt about what I just said. That  
evening garnered rave reviews. From theology, to Bible, to history, St Jude’s members had ample  
opportunity to receive didactic teaching on Christian educational topics.   
  
The class sizes oscillated between 10–60 people, included both men and women, and  
ranged in ages from 21–85. Participants sometimes came with formal theological training, and  
others attended without any prior theological or biblical knowledge. Most participants called St  
Jude their home church, but regularly people from across the Dallas/Fort Worth metroplex joined  
  
1 

  
  
our courses. Once we even had two women who commuted from Decatur, Texas each week to  
attend a “How to Study the Bible Course” with fresh farm eggs and a bundt cake in tow.  
  
One of the unique features of my particular style of teaching came at the end of every  
course. I asked students to prepare a final project they could present in the last week as a  
theological adult show-and-tell. The guidelines were simple: create anything you want that  
allows you to respond worshipfully to what you are learning. I asked my students, “What is God  
teaching you?” And “How can you create something in response to what you are learning?” Final  
projects gave students a chance to meditate upon and respond to what God taught them through  
the courses. Students cooked recipes, wrote poems, illustrated books, cross-stitched pillows,  
made mixed-media art, wrote songs, and planted flowers. While most students in formal  
education dread final projects, my theological students looked forward to a chance to show part  
of their own personality and what God was doing in and through them. Some of my favorite  
items in my home are final projects my students gifted to me after the courses finished.   
  
In addition to final projects, each class time included group discussions and interactive  
teaching. Most classes lasted 60 to 90 minutes, and I lectured for less than 40 minutes. The rest  
of the time students either talked in groups, had moments of writing reflections, or engaged in  
Q&A with me. Every single class starts with me asking the same question: “What is the goal of  
all Christian instruction?” The class responds with “Worship.” Following this antiphonal  
moment, every class included a worshipful reflection so that the evening started with pausing  
and preparing ourselves to worship, not just learn. During the first week of any new class I  
emphasized that all questions were welcomed throughout the class time. I have a personal  
ministry philosophy that “curiosity should be rewarded” and often said this phrase to my  
students.   


  
  
In summary, these theological classes varied greatly in topic and created opportunities for  
folks of all different backgrounds to come together and interact with each other and with me.  
With the final project expectations, students tended to think about the content outside of the class  
time. In other words, St Jude’s members enjoyed robust theological education through  
experiential classroom teaching.   
I am exceedingly proud of what my students produced in their final projects. Every  
semester when I saw what God had produced in my students through our theological show-and- 
tell, I had to humbly acknowledge that while I might have prepared Power-points and lectures  
and thought strategically about good questions for interactive time, the fruit of their study far  
exceeded anything I might have presented to them. God taught them deeper things than I had. If  
discipleship leads to better identity formation, these courses created opportunities for that holy  
work to take place.   
When a member of the RightNow Media staff heard about my courses and how I  
structured my class time, she invited me to speak at RightNow’s church leaders conference in  
Dallas, Texas in 2022. I wanted to show other churches how they might implement these same  
tactics into their theological and biblical courses. When forced to distill what makes a great  
course, I highlighted three elements: final projects, interactive open-ended questions, and a  
facilitator that rewards curiosity. While I received overwhelmingly positive feedback from my  
breakout session, many ministers came forward and expressed that they struggled to imagine  
how they could create a classroom with this much participation because of the size of their  
churches. Clearly, small churches could emulate my classroom strategy, but large churches— 
restrained by the size of rooms and number of participants—would need a different  
methodology.   


  
  
Prior to my post at St Jude, I worked for a mega-church in Dallas. I empathize with  
ministers who feel the constraints of the size prevent them from having more intimate moments  
in their classes. How does someone get five hundred people into a room, teach them the Bible,  
and impact their lives? I spent seven years asking this question and fell into the pattern most  
large churches do: write your own curriculum, recruit and train small-group leaders, develop a  
team of teachers that exegetes the text, and hope small-group time—where leaders ask questions  
from the curriculum—will lead to life transformation. And it does. I watched people set free by  
the gospel every semester. However, I would humbly argue that it works because God is  
gracious, not because it is the most effective way to disciple people.   
After seven years in my mega-church and then seven years in my mini-church, I have  
seen the immense fruit that comes from intentional time where students get to engage their  
imaginations, ask their questions in real time, and hear repeatedly, “What a great question!” Lest  
you think I’m critiquing the mega-church model, I want to be clear: I aim to help rather than  
criticize. If the goal of discipleship is identity formation, then parishioners need both to think  
well about the Scriptures and also how that knowledge shapes their understanding of God,  
themselves, and others.   
Besides, we have something other than mega-church models to blame. We get to blame  
Aristotle. It is time to air some grievances against Alexander the Great’s tutor. When Aristotle  
penned  Interpretation , I highly doubt he imagined it would impact 2,300 years of education in  
the Western world. Yet, here we are. Because of Aristotle, our education system suffers under the  
Declarative Fallacy which says declarative statements are enough to make a valid argument. 2   
Learners sit through lectures built upon propositional statements, whether in school or Sunday  
  
2 

  
  
school. One philosopher begs his colleagues to reconsider as he titles his essay with, ironically, a  
declarative sentence: Declaratives Are Not Enough. 3  Should he not have named it, “Are  
declaratives enough?” Either way, he goes on to persuasively argue that systematic theorists  
should stop ignoring interrogatives and imperatives and give them equal weight in any important  
study of language. Of course, he is pushing against a line echoed by “Boethius (c. 480–c. 525),  
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) and many other modern  
philosophers that ‘only propositions have truth value.’” 4  Where the philosophers go, so does the  
education system and then the churches follow. Aristotle’s  Interpretation  kills questions. 5   
We can see the strange fruit of anti-question environments in very young children.  
Researchers discovered that as children grow and mature, they ask fewer questions. From age 2– 
5 children ask approximately 40,000 questions to their parents. 6  Once they get to preschool the  
questions begin to decrease, and when they get to the point where they can read, the frequency in  
which they ask questions plummets. 7  Some might argue that questions are no longer necessary  
because the student can find the information on their own; however, the data show that students  
who ask fewer questions in school are less engaged in general. 8  Fewer questions equals less  
interest. While this data should encourage school teachers to develop more opportunities to ask  
questions and reward curiosity, I am far more concerned with what pastors, parents, and small- 
  
3 4 5 6 7 8 

  
  
group leaders do with this data. If the goal is greater engagement, we need to create cultures of  
curiosity. After all, if Jesus asked a lot of questions, shouldn’t Christians do the same? Should we  
look more like Aristotle or the Alpha and Omega?   
Aristotle makes a fun target, but he shoulders more blame for schools than churches. For  
the ecclesial setting, we have ourselves to blame. When I was twenty-two years old and fresh out  
of college, I signed up for a yearlong program at a residential care facility for troubled teens.  
During the day while the teens attended school, the “bigs” as they called us, sat in theological  
courses taught by local pastors. During a lesson on theodicy, I asked one leader about how to  
square the immense suffering in the world with the knowledge that God could stop it and  
chooses to allow it. The answer I received felt shallow and insincere. The gist of the answer was  
“God is good, you have to trust.”   
So, I asked another question, saying that answer felt unsatisfactory. This time the  
response I received came from a red-faced, beady-eyed, sixty-year-old man who ended my  
questions by screaming at me that if he couldn’t ask God why his sister was brutally raped  
repeatedly by their family member why I thought I had the right to ask theoretical questions. I  
stared at him while he shook, and the room stayed silent for an extended period. No one dared  
ask another question the rest of our time with that man. I remember this moment vividly because  
I was screamed at, but also because I never got the answer to my question. I really cared about  
the problem of evil and went to seminary to find the answer. This man assumed my question was  
theoretical, but questions rarely are. Seasoned pastors know that when a person asks about death,  
or sexuality, or evil or any number of difficult topics it is because the person is either wrestling  
with something or they love someone who is. A simple, “Why do you ask?” goes a long way.   


  
  
 I know my experience, while painful, is not unique. Throughout my fifteen years of  
pastoral ministry, I have heard too many stories of people’s questions being met with hostility,  
dismissiveness, or rebuke for lack of faith. Too many leaders in churches punish rather than  
reward curiosity. In a book about church deconstruction by the esteemed New Testament scholar  
Scot McKnight and his pastor friend Tommy Phillips the authors discuss the suspicion too many  
church leaders express when met with people rethinking and asking questions. Way too many  
people with legitimate questions about Scripture, theology, or life have been taught that the  
“heart is desperately wicked and deceitful, always desiring the wrong thing (except what some  
authority decides you should want) . . . you can’t trust yourself or your questions, therefore  
trusting your own gut and asking questions must be deconstructing.” 9    
Authoritative and insecure clergy rage against the trend of deconstruction without an  
ounce of self-examination that might lead to the realization that their curiosity-killing methods  
and teaching pushes people out of the pews. These leaders rage against deconstruction while the  
Nathans around them plead with them to see “they are that man.” Too many wounded  
parishioners leave the church for good for daring to ask important questions. We must do better.  
The project I designed aims primarily to positively form a person’s identity. Secondarily, and  
maybe even paramount to the first goal, I aim to foster a culture of curiosity and safer  
exploration of life’s big questions.  
My ministry context allowed me to ethically experiment upon my devout students. As  
mentioned, I have taught everything under the sun to them. They could pass plenty of first-year  
seminary courses with their current knowledge from our time together. Ask one of my students to  
  
9 

  
  
define the Trinity, and you will hear “God is eternally three persons, one essence.” This context  
allowed me to test a simple theory. If I taught nothing, but instead gave them questions to ask  
and answer with a partner on their own, would this result in a net positive in their relationship  
with God, themselves, and others? Strip away the teaching, the final projects, the razzle dazzle  
that I like to think I bring to the classroom, and only ask intentional, open-ended, deeply  
personal, well-crafted questions. Does doing so positively shape a Christian’s identity? If it does,  
then the questions I created in this experiment could be a resource in the toolbox of any minister  
regardless of the size of their ministry. And, if it does, then by providing questions, we might  
even create a culture within our ministries that welcomes even more questions. Whether in a  
mega-church, mini-church, or minivan, anyone who wants to disciple others well could use this  
experiment as a guide to help them in that endeavor.   
If discipleship is identity formation, and if asking questions can positively shape our  
understanding of God’s identity, our self-identity, and our neighbor’s identity, then the aim of this  
thesis is to create a resource for ministers, moms, aunts, professors, small group leaders, and  
everyone who has ever been asked, “Will you disciple me?” I want to help the church. I want to  
help ministers. I want to help those who genuinely want to care for others. And I want to help  
those who have felt dismissed, belittled, or punished for daring to ask questions. This experiment  
has its roots in St Jude, its branches are intended for any would-be discipler or for those who  
want their curiosity rewarded.   
Jesus asks a lot of questions, and if we follow his lead, we should not be surprised if good  
fruit and greater love results from modeling our discipleship practices after him. In the next few  
chapters, I will define discipleship as identity formation and then look at Jesus’s use of question- 
asking as he discipled others. Next, I will sketch the design of the project and the results of the  


  
  
experiment. Finally, I will suggest theological reflections and suggestions for those hoping to  
implement more questions into their ministry contexts.   
  
  


  
  
CHAPTER 2:  
DISCIPLESHIP AS IDENTITY FORMATION:   
DEFINING OUR TERMS AND MAKING JESUS OUR MODEL  
  
  
  
Any time I want to know what evangelical pop-culture thinks of something, I allow the  
SEO optimization at Google give me the answers. After searching “How do we make disciples?”  
in my Google chrome browser, the first page offers articles from  Ligonier Ministries ,  Desiring  
God , and  Disciple First . 10  If you click on  Desiring God , the article beautifully articulates how  
Jesus made disciples. He called men (exclusively men in this article) to worship him and then  
emulate his life. However, when the article turns to discussing how Christians today should  
disciple, it moves into mentorship jargon. The author summarizes with, “ Disciple-making , in this  
context, is the process in which a stable, mature believer invests himself, for a particular period  
of time, in one or a few younger believers, in order to help their growth in the faith — including  
helping them also to invest in others who will invest in others.” 11  The popular notion that  
discipleship is akin to Barnabas mentoring Paul who mentors Timothy undergirds this  
methodology.   
Clicking on  Ligonier  offers a more Scripture-based model of discipleship. While stating  
“a learner is a listener and a practitioner” the article narrowly defines the source of information  
for the learner: the Bible. 12  While teaching the Bible certainly plays a part in the discipleship  
  
10 11 12 

  
  
process, to summarize the entirety of Christoformity as knowing writ robs Jesus while paying  
Moses, Paul, and Peter. The  Disciple First  fellas offer a programmatic approach by sketching  
discipleship as 1) selecting the right person; 2) picking the right tool (tools here refer to  
discipleship curriculums from Navigators, Campus Crusade, and CBMC); 3) move in stages, not  
too much in the beginning; 4) take the man with you (perhaps to sporting events) and finally; 5)  
expose the man to evangelistic opportunities. 13  For  Disciple First,  discipleship happens through  
teaching a curriculum and emulation of the discipler. While I do not wish to overly critique these  
articles, as all three include very insightful and thoughtful ways to help others grow in their faith  
journeys, observation of some omissions reveals the need to help ministers add identity  
formation to their definition of “make disciples.”   
  
Interestingly, none of the articles mention baptizing as part of the discipleship process. 14   
Given the close proximity of “baptizing” and “teaching” to “make disciples” in the Great  
Commission (Matt 28:18–20), one wonders why all three articles heavily emphasize teaching but  
neglect baptizing. As we will argue later, baptizing was a means of identity formation and its  
omission here is curious. Furthermore, the  Desiring God  articles does not mention love at all,  
and the  Desiring First  article says we should love others far from God.  Ligonier  mentions love  
repeatedly as a way to emulate Christ and should be commended for this.   
If asked to infer from their articles the assumed goal of discipleship, the answers would  
include Scripture exegesis and missional behavior. None mention the type of people discipleship- 
making should produce. If all a person had was the first page of Google, the goal of discipleship  
  
13 14 

  
  
would somewhat include looking like Christ, but the emphasis would fall upon mentorship,  
Scripture reading, and evangelism. And no one would get baptized.   
Again, I do not want to set these three articles and ministries up as punching bags. Much  
of their content deserves commendation. However, their priority in the Google search means they  
represent a fairly accurate picture of discipleship in American, evangelical churches. While their  
context approximates discipleship, it misses a key component: identity formation. Discipleship is  
about more than following Christ; it includes who we become. In what follows I will briefly  
define identity and then discuss what Jesus meant when he spoke those famous words at the  
Great Commission—words Matthew later recorded. By looking narrowly at the Gospel of  
Matthew, we will conclude that discipleship is following Christ and forming people into greater  
Christlikeness. As we will see, this formation impacts the way we view God, ourselves, and our  
membership within the community of God’s people. Discipleship impacts more than what we do;  
rather, it primarily impacts who and whose we are, which then results in changed behaviors.  
Changed identities change conduct.    
  
Defining Identity  
  
What is identity? To exhaustively answer this question, I would need an entire sociology  
degree and probably a counseling degree, as well. Instead, the definition presented here relies on  
broad sketches, though accurate, to move the argument in this thesis along. One writer defines  
human identity as “a working hypothesis of the self…a process in which individuals draw on  
both internal and external cultural resources for their self-understanding and self-expression.” 15   
  
15 

  
  
Identity then answers, “Who am I?” and “How am I supposed to act?” With this component of  
acting, “identity formation has a moral content and should in principle be open to moral  
evaluation.” 16  A person’s individual identity impacts how she behaves in the world and therefore  
needs shaping. Another approach to identity emphasizes the way a person understands  
themselves in a group setting known as Social Identity Theory. This theory states, “social  
identity is defined as ‘the individual’s knowledge that he belongs to certain social groups  
together with some emotional and value significance to him of the group membership.’” 17  In  
other words, our identity includes who we are amongst others, and that carries with it emotional  
significance to us. It matters deeply not only who I am, but who am I as a member of different  
groups. James Clear, in his book on forming habits that will stick, dedicates an entire chapter to  
how family and friends impact our behaviors. He summarizes this chapter by stating, “The  
culture we live in determines which behaviors are attractive to us. We tend to adopt habits that  
are praised and approved of by our culture because we have a strong desire to fit in and belong to  
the tribe.” 18  The age-old adage, “Tell me who your friends are, and I will tell you who you are”  
holds true in the Social Identity Theory.   
These two slightly different definitions of identity beg the question: Is identity about who  
I am individually or about who I am corporately? Yes. It turns out the equal ultimacy of the one  
and many applies to our self-identity. If one were to ask a trinitarian scholar what mattered more,  
Jesus’s distinction as the Son of God or his unity as the member of the Trinity, he hopefully  
would hear “both.” Admittedly, if a person who originates from cultures that over-emphasize  
  
16 17 18 

  
  
group settings was asked who she is, you might hear more group-related definitions. And, the  
opposite, of course, would be true from the pick-yourself-up-by-your-bootstraps influenced  
person. In her book on the role of community in church transformation, Boyung Lee observes,  
“Koreans, like many African, Hispanic, Native, and other Asian American cultures, view the  
person as a part of a whole. In contrast, most European cultures person independent and  
autonomous.” 19  Despite these  differences of emphasis, researchers would later note in an article  
comparing Identity Theory with Social Identity Theory, combining the strengths of these two  
theories of identity formation might lead to a better understanding of individuals. 20  If God made  
humanity in the image of the Triune who eternally exists as three persons and one essence, then  
we should not be surprised to find that one understands herself through her individuality  and   
place within a community. 21  What is my identity? It is how you view yourself and how you view  
yourself as one of the group.   
As Christians though, another portion of our identity permeates who I am individually  
and who I am as a member of the community. We wrestle with what it means to be the image of  
God (Gen 1:27). Being the  imago Dei  means more than simply having godlike capabilities such  
  
19 20 21 

  
  
as reasoning and storytelling that German Shepherds lack. 22  Rather, “we need to view the  imago  
Dei  as a declaration that God intended to create human persons to be the physical means through  
which he would manifest his own divine presence in the world.” 23  God bless the middle school  
pastors who must guide pre-pubescent teens through acne, cliques, and manifesting an infinite  
God in third period English class. However, the task of such leaders is nothing short of what I’ve  
described. This means to truly know ourselves, we must know God. Otherwise we misunderstand  
our role as the image of God. In his first chapter of his giant  Institutes , John Calvin captures this  
sentiment well as he wrote:   
Nearly all wisdom we possess, that is to say, true and sound wisdom, consists almost  
entirely of two parts: the knowledge of God and of ourselves. But while joined by many  
bonds, which one precedes and brings forth the other is not easy to discern. In the first  
place, no one can look upon himself without immediately turning his thoughts to the  
contemplation of God, in who he “lives and moves” [Acts 17:28]. For, quite clearly, the  
mighty gifts with which we are endowed are hardly from ourselves; indeed, our very  
being is nothing but subsistence in the one God. Then, by these benefits shed like dew  
from heaven upon us, we are led as by rivulets to the spring itself. 24    
  
To know oneself, one must know God, but the exploration can start with God or the mirror. With  
all due respect to Calvin, I would add to his thesis that the knowledge of others also allows us to  
more fully know God and self. Despite the omission, Calvin rightly acknowledges that  
knowledge of God and self must hold hands as they are inextricably linked through the  imago  
Dei .    
  
22 23 24 

  
  
  
If we combine the social theories of identity and theological understanding of humanity’s  
blueprint, then we can surmise that identity is  broadly a person’s ongoing understanding of God,  
self, and others.  Furthermore, since identity is complex and static, it means the understanding of  
God, oneself, and the other must simultaneously coalesce into a person’s total identity. More  
simply, identity formation is asking and answering: Who is God?, Who am I?, Who are others?,  
And, how do these realities relate? As we dive into the definition of discipleship, we will see that  
discipleship is in fact doing the same thing. It is helping us learn about God, ourselves, and  
others. That knowledge and implementing how to relate and act according to that knowledge  
results in greater conformity to Christ. Afterall, if you learn that God is love, and you learn you  
are made in the image of God, does that not mean you will then learn you must also spend your  
life dedicated to self-donating, loving relationships as God has done? Discipleship forms us, and  
part of that formation is forming our identity. When Jesus commanded his followers to make  
disciples, he in part commands them to shape others’ identities. However, as we have already  
noted, “making disciples” conjures various meanings, so I must now assert my definition of  
discipleship.    
  
Defining Discipleship  
  
Matthew records Jesus’s words in the Great Commission—"Go, therefore, and make  
disciples of   all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy  
Spirit, teaching them to observe everything I have commanded you. And remember, I am with  
you always, to the end of the age.” 25  The original audience would already have been familiar  
with the term “make disciples” (a singular word in the Greek). Discipleship was not unique or  
  
25 

  
  
even original to the Christian movement. Prior to the first century, religious, philosophical, and  
political leaders all had followers committed to their causes, teachings, and beliefs. The most  
commonly used word to refer to these acolytes was “disciple” ( μαθητής ). 26  In fact the idea of a  
disciple was so prominent in the Greek-speaking world, philosophers debated  how  discipleship  
should take place. In Demosthenes  Against Lacritus  the author expresses frustration at Lacritus’s  
defrauding others of a loan he took. As Demosthenes makes his case against the teacher, he states  
that Lacritus thinks he is clever enough and trusts in his speech enough to help him fool the  
judge and jury. Demosthenes also takes aim at Lacritus’s practice of taking money from pupils  
and teaching them self-professed knowledge. 27  Lacritus sounds sheisty, but notice the name  
given to his pupils is that of “disciple” ( μαθητής ). Socrates and Plato take issue with the way  
Sophists go about discipling others and claim that a better way is to draw out innate knowledge  
rather than fill up with one’s own. 28  One wonders if Plato and Socrates spent enough time around  
toddlers, but regardless, the term for their students is also “disciple” ( μαθητής ).   
Hippocrates, famous for his oath, rejected the idea of taking money but committed “By  
precept, lecture, and every other mode of instruction, I will impart a knowledge of the Art to my  
  
26 27 28 

  
  
own sons, and those of my teachers, and to disciples.” 29  By the time of Jesus, in the Greek  
speaking world the practice of having disciples as people to whom a person could pass down  
knowledge—innate or otherwise—was the dominating definition of the term.   
Once Jesus starts collecting his own disciples, the term takes on another nuance:  
adherent. Rather than simply describing teacher-student relationship, “disciple” also could be  
akin to “follower” or “devotee.” In his Discourse on Homer and Socrates, Dio Chrysostom  
describes the master-disciple relationship in stronger terms than simply informational  
transaction. He writes, “you make it evident that on general grounds you are an  admirer  of  
Socrates and also that you are  filled with wonder  at the man as revealed in his words, you can tell  
me of which among the sages he was a pupil ( μαθητής )” (emphasis mine). 30  One wonders why  
the Loeb translation uses “pupil” rather than a stronger word given the language of “admire” and  
“filled with wonder.” Either way, Dio Chrysostom captures some of the stronger bonds between  
the master-disciple relationship in the Hellenized world. Interestingly, he continues in his  
discourse to argue that Socrates was in fact a disciple of Homer, though the two men could have  
never met. To make his case, Dio Chrysostom points to the similarities between the two men as  
evidence that Homer, though long dead by the time of Socrates, discipled him from the grave.   
For Dio Chrysostom, imitation correlates to discipleship. If it walks, talks, and quacks  
like a duck, it was probably discipled by a duck. In this understanding, discipleship “assumed the  
development of a sustained commitment of the disciple to the master and to the master’s  
particular teaching or mission and the relationship extended to imitation of the conduct of the  
  
29 30 

  
  
master as it impacted the personal life of the disciple.” 31  Thus, discipleship by the time of Jesus  
included passing along information, remaining devoted to the discipler, and inevitably imitating  
of the exemplar.    
  
In addition to the Greco-Roman Gentile world, the idea of having disciples had also  
permeated the Hellenized Jewish world. Mark tells us in his Gospel that the Pharisees had  
disciples (Mark 2:18). Interestingly, the Pharisees are said to have disciples despite the fact that  
they represented a religious-political party. This would be akin to calling those who vote for  
Democrats as “disciples of the Democrats” instead of “Democrat,” as is typical. However, such  
usage reveals the term might be used in a “non-technical sense of ‘followers,’ referring to those  
sympathetic to Pharisaic beliefs.” 32    
During a conflict between Jesus and the Pharisees about the healing of a blind man, the  
blind man asks the Pharisees if they want to become Jesus’s disciples. The Pharisees respond  
indignantly with “We are Moses’ disciples!” (John 9:24-29). Keener believes this retort echoes  
genuine Pharisaic tradition, as later rabbis could speak of ultimately receiving revelation from  
Moses on Sinai. 33  In a similar vein Philo says in his work  Cherubim  that:   
having been initiated in the great mysteries by Moses, the friend of God, nevertheless,  
when subsequently I beheld Jeremiah the prophet, and learnt that he was not only  
initiated into the sacred mysteries, but was also a competent hierophant or expounder of  
them, did not hesitate to become his pupil. 34    
  
  
31 32 33 34 

  
  
This word rendered “pupil” here is the same word Matthew uses for disciple ( μαθητής ). While  
the Pharisees directly claimed to be disciples of Moses, Philo goes through the proxy of Jeremiah  
the prophet. Yet, the Jewish tradition, like the Hellenized Gentile one, allowed for posthumous  
discipleship. In addition to the Pharisees, John the Baptist had disciples (John 1:35–37). Though,  
John, playing the part of the frontrunner well, tells his disciples they should follow Jesus instead.  
One wonders if those disciples wore camel-hair tunics and chowed on locusts. Did they learn  
from, adhere to,  and  imitate John?   
In summary, the practice of a person welcoming students as disciples permeated both the  
Greco-Roman Gentile and Jewish subcultures of the first century. As noted above, these  
relationships included knowledge transfer, devotion, and imitation. Some disciples, received  
instruction from writings and other posthumous sources as the discipler had already passed away.  
Which brings us to ask question, what Jesus meant when he says to “make disciples?” Does he  
have in mind the Platonic idea of pulling out innate knowledge in a person? Does he want to  
simply impart knowledge like the Sophists and Moses-ites? Does he want his disciples to imitate  
him? How can we understand the contours of Jesus’s discipleship compared to his  
contemporaries?    
  
Jesus’s Discipleship  
  
Of all the things Jesus could choose to say to his friends before his ascension, he decides  
to tell them that he has all authority and they should go make disciples of everyone, baptizing  
them and teaching them to obey all that Christ taught. He could have said, “Make sure you build  
churches and steeples” or “Focus heavily on miracles and Spirit-informed sermons” or “Tell  
them I like the WWJD bracelets.” Instead, he emphasizes making disciples as his final command  


  
  
in Matthew. All pastors know that most people listen to the beginning of a sermon and then tune  
out until after the summary of three points and the poem. We put our best material at the end. If  
this is Jesus’s final charge, Christians would do well to understand what it means…and then just  
do it. 35  So, what does Jesus want when he tells his followers to make disciples?   
  
If you read a smattering of commentaries on Matthew 28:19, much is made of the  
participles  surrounding the main verb ( μαθητεύσατε ) “make disciples.” For example, Craig  
Blomberg flattens the main verb when he struggles to articulate how much weight should be  
given to the imperative versus the attendant participle “to go.” He rightly notes, “The main  
command of Christ’s commission is ‘make disciples,’” but he then diminishes the force of the  
imperative as he continues, “Too much and too little have often been made of this observation.  
Too much is made of it when the disciples' ‘going’ is overly subordinated, so that Jesus’s charge  
is to proselytize merely where one is…” 36  For Blomberg, trying to understand Jesus’s charge  
requires one make sense of the participle and measure it against the weight of the main verb in  
the command—you cannot make disciples unless you know how you should go. Three-fourths of  
his paragraph dedicated to v.19a is dedicated to weighing the “go” and he does not put forth a  
clear definition of the imperative on its own except to make reference to evangelism. “Make  
disciples” surely means more than evangelize. He must assume the reader intuits what “make  
disciples” means.    
Another Craig, Keener, also allows the participles to define the meaning of “make  
disciples.” He asserts, “The text is clear on the other ways one makes disciples. First of all, one  
baptizes them under the rulership of Christ…mature disciples must also build the new disciples  
  
35 36 

  
  
into stronger discipleship by teaching them Jesus’s message.” 37  In his IVP Bible Background  
Commentary, Keener even more explicitly defines “make disciples” by stating “making disciples  
involves three elements: 1) going…2) baptizing… 3) teaching.” 38    
R.T. France agrees wholeheartedly as he posits about the Commission, “The sentence  
structure is of a main verb in the imperative, ‘make disciples,’ followed by two uncoordinated  
participles, ‘baptizing,’ ‘teaching,’  which spell out the process of making disciples  (emphasis  
mine). 39  While I am not in the habit of disagreeing with esteemed scholars, one wonders how  
they would define “make disciples” if Jesus had left off the participles. Does “make disciples”  
have its own meaning apart from these descriptors?   
To be clear, going, baptizing, and teaching must be part of the discipleship process if  
Jesus included them here. Yet, the verb “ μαθητεύσατε ” carries the imperatival force of the  
command and has its own definition apart from the explanatory clauses. In his Greek Grammar,  
Daniel B. Wallace says of dependent verbal participles (in our case going, baptizing, teaching),  
that “adverbial participles like adverbs are dependent on a verb.” 40  Dr. Wallace sometimes states  
the obvious as he constantly seeks the utmost clarity in his writing.  Depend ent verb clauses  
depend  on the main clause. Going, baptizing, and teaching depend on making disciples, not the  
  
37 38 39 40 

  
  
other way around. Certainly, they modify and explain, but they only help clarify the main verb  
rather than encapsulate it.   
Perhaps a better way to relate the verb and its participles, comes from Lindsay Arthur  
who deserves quoting at length:  
A major implication of the argument that 28:19 is governed by a semantic structure of  
ideological particularization is that the reader considers the possibility that the Matthean  
Jesus gives a general command,  μαθητεύσατε  (Matt 28:19a), which he particularizes in  
the surrounding participles, developing or unpacking that command, without necessarily  
exhausting its meaning. This permits the reader to examine the remainder of Matthew to  
discover any additional meaning that may reside there. If this is the preferred approach,  
and I believe that should be, then the reader may find that the proverbial whole (i.e.  
μαθητεύσατε,  28:19a) is greater the sum of its parts (i.e., the adjoining participles). 41    
  
In other words, make disciples gets shading from the surrounding participles, but gets the rest of  
its definitional vibrancy from the entire Gospel of Matthew. How do we make disciples? Allow  
Matthew’s portrayal of discipleship from start to finish to define the term. It is not less than  
baptizing and teaching but certainly is more.    
In addition to grammar, narrative criticism also points us to looking at the whole of  
Matthew for understanding of our term  μαθητεύσατε. 42   Pointing to the redaction criticism method  
of analysis, Richard Edwards writes, “it is argued, for example, that a careful comparison of all  
references to the disciples (descriptions, synonyms, etc.) would produce an accurate  
  
41 42 

  
  
reconstruction of the author’s understanding of the disciples.” 43  He then counters by saying this  
methodology does not take into account that Matthew chose to write his Gospel as a story, not an  
essay. He continues, “It is because the Gospel is a story that I want to place primary emphasis on  
the portrayal of the disciples as characters in the narrative.” 44    
While redaction criticism has produced terrific analysis on discipleship, “scholarly study,  
of late, has been enriched and enlivened by a different approach, one that takes seriously the  
narrative character of the Gospels and sets out to examine them as stories.” 45  The Gospels are  
stories, and stories require analytical tools native to their genre.    
All great students of literature know that the use of story means the author gets to show  
instead of tell what he means. The reader of a narrative must look at the descriptions  and  the  
portrayals to understand the nature of something or someone. By analyzing the story and in  
particular the way the disciples are portrayed, “Matthew is, in fact, also guiding his readers to  
understanding what discipleship will mean for them.” 46  The whole story—description  and   
dialogue, prose  and  poetry, setting  and  symbolism—show us what something is like. For  
example, if you want to know what Lucy Pevensie is like, you have to read the scene where she  
sticks her face into Aslan’s mane, read the dialogue between the characters, and take note of the  
descriptions. All of those moments define Lucy. For discipleship, you must do the same when  
you read the word disciple or see discipleship taking place.   
  
43 44 45 46 

  
  
So how does discipleship get portrayed through the story? For starters the two bookends  
of the discipleship process—calling and commissioning—have repeated vocabulary which tells  
the reader the two passages are connected. When one compares Matthew 4:19 and 28:19 the  
“declarations are connected by elements relating to time (beginning and end of a journey),  
location (both events occur in Galilee), characters (Jesus and his disciples are common to both  
events), and semantics (words of similar meaning are common to both accounts).” 47  These  
literary connections likely mean that Matthew sees the latter command as an extension of the  
former. The disciples are called to fish men and then commissioned to make disciples. What  
happens in between fills out the meaning of man-fishing and disciple-making.   
The first bookend also gives us some context unrelated to the Great Commission. In  
stories “the initial appearance of a character is often important, for it creates expectations that the  
readers carry with them into the rest of the story…the reader’s first impression of the disciples is  
that they will function as Jesus’s ‘helpers.’” 48  In other words, when Jesus calls the disciples and  
they drop everything (Matt 4), he does so because he intends to turn them into disciple makers  
that serve him. Jesus makes disciples that make disciples of Jesus. Rather than a pyramid scheme  
where each disciple gathers more disciples to himself, Jesus’s disciples are to serve Jesus by  
fishing people  for  Jesus. Matthew makes this clear from the outset so the reader can look for how  
this will happen as the story unfolds.   
Making disciples for Jesus rather than for oneself is one of the unique features of Jesus’s  
discipleship. While other masters assume their disciples will eventually gain followers of their  
  
47 48 

  
  
own, the entire Christian discipleship experience means making disciples who follow Christ, not  
other Christ followers.   
The uniform usage of  μαθητής  “always implies the existence of a personal attachment  
which shapes the whole life of the one described as  μαθητής,  and which in its particularity leaves  
no doubt as to who is deploying the formative power.” 49  Jesus forms disciples. Jesus ultimately  
μαθητεύσατε.  Certainly, imitation, teaching, and closeness will mark the relationship of the  
fellow disciples, but all subsequent disciples’ identities change as followers of Jesus. 50   
Admittedly, Paul does say to follow him as he follows Christ, but one could hardly read all of his  
thirteen letters and assume Paul wishes for people to call themselves “Disciples of Paul.” Just  
one peek at the letter to the Corinthians where he with some modicum of snark mocks their  
divisions and one sees his understanding of discipleship comports with Jesus’s view put forth by  
Matthew. 51     
After the initial calling, Matthew sketches a robust picture of discipleship through various  
literary means. Matthew records Jesus teaching (most obviously seen in the five great  
discourses), 52  modeling behavior, answering questions or objections, calling for distinctive  
living, and sharing meals with surprising guests. Looking at the entirety of the Matthean  
  
49 50 51 52 

  
  
narrative, one sees the multifaceted nature of discipleship. Rather than simply baptizing and  
teaching, “a whole array of actions, attributes, and qualities come to be associated with his  
narration with the discipleship ideal.” 53  Put more simply, “disciples are to make disciples of  
others in the same way that Jesus made disciples of them throughout the Gospel.” 54  This means  
teaching, caring, healing, loving, and breaking bread together, among other things.   
As one sorts through the kaleidoscopic picture of discipleship, identity formation  
activities begin to emerge. Through the various discipleship activities, disciples inevitably grow  
in their understanding of God, themselves, and others. Regarding God, disciples must answer  
Jesus when he asks, “Who do you say that I am?” (Matt 16:13–17). They have to wrestle with  
Jesus walking on water—something only God can do (Matt 14:22–33). They must give to God  
what belongs to God (Matt 22:15–22). Regarding self-identity, disciples must know what it  
means to pick up their cross and follow Jesus (Matt 16:24–28). They must also deal with the  
intolerable compliment that God would go looking for them like a shepherd would go after a lost  
sheep (Matt 18:10–14).   
Disciples must deal with the highs and lows of great understanding and at times  
necessary rebuke (Matt 16:13–23). Regarding the understanding of others, disciples must be  
shaped by both passages of love of others (Matt 22:34–40) as well as differentiation of behavior  
from other groups (Matt 20:24–28). They also must understand what it means to be salt, light,  
and a city upon a hill (Matt 5:13–16).   
  
53 54 

  
  
The discipleship process in Matthew shapes a person’s understanding of God’s identity,  
their own identity, and the identity of others. Though we limited our study to Matthew because of  
its inclusion of the Great Commission, Ernest Best wrote a terrific book on discipleship in the  
Gospel of Mark. In it, Best proposes the best way to study discipleship is by considering “the  
disciple in relation to himself; how he must view himself and deal with himself and what is  
required from him….and the disciple in relation to others…those who are not yet  
Christians…and those who are his fellow disciples.” Best, in other words, believes discipleship is  
best understood by considering how the person begins to understand himself and others. 55  I agree  
with Best. If discipleship is more than baptizing and teaching, then covering the pages of the  
Gospels are examples of discipleship. Within those examples identities get formed.   
  
What about Baptizing and Teaching?  
  
If “making disciples” has to do with the activities found in the entire book of Matthew,  
why does Jesus include the two qualifiers of baptizing and teaching? When considering what  
baptizing and teaching accomplish, they serve as helpful metonymy for much of the discipleship  
identify formation enterprise. From an analysis of all of Matthew, one can conclude that  
“discipleship means not only trusting in Jesus and identifying with him, as baptism pictures, but  
also the pursuit of obeying him,” 56  which necessitates teaching for future disciples. Baptism  
serves as a shorthand for calling, believing, and conversion. Teaching allows the disciples to  
learn about God and what is expected as a member of this group of Jesus-followers in which they  
  
55 56 

  
  
now belong. Teaching also includes the attendant following and obeying of this teaching. Taking  
a closer look at both baptism and teaching also reveals the identity formation component of  
discipleship.    
  
Baptizing Forms Identities  
  
If one wants to argue that discipleship is ultimately identity formation, then turning to the  
participle “baptizing” offers perhaps the strongest case. For starters the three-fold name in which  
a person is baptized demonstrates that the person is “brought existentially in the sphere of, and in  
submission to, the active, powerful presence of the Father, Son, and Spirit, so that one  belongs  to  
the Father, Son, and Spirit (e.g. 1 Cor 1:10-17)” (emphasis mine). 57  The act of baptism  
symbolizes a transference of proprietorship—the subject belongs to God now (or, perhaps more  
accurately, she is declaring to others she recognizes she belongs to God now because she already  
did). And, as Paul emphasizes to the Corinthians, this belonging to God puts a person into a  
group of others who also belong to God. Identity takes shape as one who lives in the recognition  
of God’s claim on her life and as she rises from the waters and looks around, she sees the  
community of the claimed rejoicing in the decision.   
  
For modern, western Christians, the identity formation that happens at baptism strikes at  
the heart our psychological needs. Our therapeutic culture in the twentieth century tied one’s  
happiness to their self-esteem, and that self-esteem was tied to public recognition. 58  This “quest  
for identity concerns an innate soul-cry on the part of every person for recognition,  
  
57 58 

  
  
acknowledgement, and worth. Christian baptism speaks profoundly to the individual at the level  
of personal identity.” 59  Drop into any church baptism and listen to the words spoken over the  
catechumen and consider how those might meet a deep need to be affirmed and recognized.  
Language like “washed”, “new life”, “brother” or “sister”, “belong”, “rejoice”, “hope”,  
“imperishable inheritance”, “election”, and “chosen”, often give context to the baptism. Those  
affirmations this will shape the person’s understanding of self. At its best:  
baptism is an entrée into a participation in the life of the triune God, into the eternal  
communion of love, peace, fellowship, and mission that is the triune life, and into an  
experience in which the baptizand is now embraced, as they find themselves loved and  
accepted, acknowledged and recognized, forgiven and reconciled, by a love that posits  
and creates worth. 60    
  
Trinitarian identity, personal identity, and group identity all bound up into the sacrament of  
baptism helps achieve discipleship’s goal.   
  
In addition to baptism forming the catechumen, it also forms the community of witnesses.  
Someone once told me that he baptized himself in his bathtub one night after a mystical moment  
with Jesus. I have no doubt about the sincerity of his faith in that moment, but I asked if he  
would like to also have a public baptism with his church community. Not wanting to invalidate  
his very real experience with God, I explained that baptism not only meant something  
meaningful to him, but it would also mean something to us as we get to participate and rejoice in  
his powerful moment. At its best, liturgy shapes people. 61  Sacraments shape people.   
  
59 60 61 

  
  
Something mystical and transformational happens when week in and week out a person  
performs the truths of the Christian faith. While looking at character formation, one researcher  
noted “a conceptual and intrinsic, rather than merely external and causal, relationship between  
liturgy and ethics, arguing that prayer and worship over time form believers in deep affections  
characteristic of biblically inspired Christian tradition.” 62  When you participate in worship, your  
insides change, not just your outside behavior.   
Performance theorists have realized in their study what Christian practice suggested all  
along: “Ritual is the key to its function in the development and maintenance of human  
identity.” 63  From the feasts in Leviticus and Deuteronomy to the gathered worship of Corinthians  
to the worship in Revelation, God instituted and will institute rituals to form our identities. When  
a person is baptized, not only do they undergo identity formation, but those who watch are  
reminded of their own identity. This reminding, if done repeatedly, shapes their affections and  
allegiances.   
One powerful study of group identity formed by religious liturgy came out of the  
American Journal of Psychology . 64  Researchers discovered that towns in the south in 1890–1929  
experienced fewer lynchings of black people where there was a greater incidence of mixed-race  
churches. Tragically, the study also purported that towns without integrated churches but that had  
larger numbers of black-controlled religious groups experienced higher levels of racial violence.  
The researchers concluded that without the integration, racial hierarchy was strengthened in  
  
62 63 64 

  
  
white-only pews. But, in churches where both black and white parishioners took communion,  
they created cross-racial solidarity that diminished racial violence.   
Liturgy forms and at times malforms people. Breaking bread with “the other” can literally  
save lives as a person begins to understand there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism. If an  
individual takes bread and wine from the same table as me, then in some way they belong to me.  
This is why Paul can repeatedly point to baptism as a metaphor to remind the Galatians of their  
new identity in Christ as the children of Abraham (Gal 3:27–28) and can rebuke the Corinthians  
for failing to live as one body, which was accomplished through baptism into one Spirit (1 Cor  
12:13). Baptism shapes the whole community, and a helpful pastoral directive to realign division  
and competing allegiances and identities is “Remember your baptism.” That small phrase carries  
big meaning.  
  
Teaching Forms Us    
  
Circling back to our Google SEO optimizations, hardly anyone would define discipleship  
without including a teaching component. For our three articles, this seems to be the crux of the  
definition. I am a teacher; I wholeheartedly agree that teaching is tantamount in discipleship.  
However, perhaps the issue churches have had over the years is missing the telos of teaching.  
Information transference matters tremendously in Geometry and carpentry, but a bigger, more  
transformative goal should undergird discipleship’s strategy.   
When looking at post-colonial writing on the Great Commission, justifiable lament  
occurs over the way the Commission has been abused to justify subjugation in the name of  
evangelistic fervor. This should never be. A common thread in post-colonial discussions on Matt  
28:18–20 highlights “an undue emphasis on teaching over the other activities, like social justice,  


  
  
in traditional interpretations and applications of the Great Commission.” 65  However, I would  
argue the bigger problem is the cherry-picking of what people teach, because Jesus talks about  
social justice all the time. In fact, the weightier things of the law are justice (Matt 23:23). 66   
Furthermore, teaching “is also specified in the final commissioning as teaching  obedience  to all  
that Jesus has commanded. Given that Jesus’s exhortations in Matthew have highlighted justice,  
mercy, and covenant loyalty…it will not do to isolate the activity of teaching from social  
justice.” 67    
If someone teaches the commands of Jesus but never performs acts of social justice, then  
he is like a pickleball coach who does not own a paddle and balls. That person should not only be  
unemployed, but therapy should be suggested. The “teaching” referenced in the Great  
Commission involves obedience. 68  Obedience stems from normative behaviors expected of those  
whose identity has been shaped as the redeemed of God, energized for doing good works, and  
  
65 66 67 68 

  
  
grouped together in a community meant to be salt and light in a decaying and dark world.  
Teaching should shape our understanding of God, ourselves, and others. Anything less should not  
be called biblical teaching.    
  
Formation for Matthew’s Readers  
  
Not only did Jesus intend to shape his first hearers through his teaching, but Matthew also  
clearly intends to shape the readers of his Gospel in the way he presents Jesus’s teaching. For  
starters, Matthew uses strategic terms to define and delineate “insiders” vs “outsiders”—a  
necessary component of identity formation. While  Mean Girls  shows the ugly side of exclusion,  
it is necessary to know which groups a person belongs to and the expectation of behavior as a  
member of that group. Matthew likes to use “righteousness” to define the identity of Jesus’s  
followers against outsider groups. 69  When Matthew uses this term, he means those who commit  
to covenant faithfulness or conformity to God’s word. 70  Calling Jesus’s followers “righteous”  
forms our understanding of how we are to behave as members of this privileged group.   
In addition to using names and descriptions, Greco-Roman groups had other ways to  
differentiate themselves. Such ways included having a central focus; claiming exclusive  
revelation; practicing unique rituals; creating and adhering to social organization; criticizing of  
opponents; articulating the community’s origin story; and aligning expectation of the  
  
69 70 

  
  
community’s behaviors. 71  Matthew employs all of these differentiating elements to the effect that  
his gospel is “identity-forming and lifestyle shaping narrative…it shapes the appropriate way of  
life, set of practices and behaviors.” 72  Not only did Jesus’s teaching shape a person, but  
Matthew’s presentation of Jesus’s whole life intends to form subsequent Christians’ identities.   
If you grabbed a pencil and wrote down everything you observed about the disciples of  
Jesus, you would jot down many behaviors, values, names, and rituals that set a person apart  
from those who do not follow Jesus. Teaching the book of Matthew as he intended will result in  
the hearers having a greater conscientiousness of the collective righteousness of those who  
belong to Jesus.   
Conclusion  
  
Discipleship is identity formation. From the first-century disciples who walked with Jesus  
to those who must learn about those strolls through the Gospels, the discipleship process aims to  
change a person’s understanding of God, herself, and others. Baptizing and teaching do a good  
job summarizing the main activities of discipleship. And, within those two activities we see  
inherent identity -ormation elements. A person is spiritually changed by baptism, and they are  
also psychologically changed as they adopt a change in their relationships to the Trinity and  
others in the triune’s family. As the community watches the baptism, they are reminded of their  
own identity and strengthened through the reminder. Discipleship without teaching is dead. But,  
teaching without works is not discipleship. Teaching the words  and  actions of Jesus fill out the  
contours of the discipleship curriculum, but the classroom is meant to be an immersive  
experience, not lecture.   
  
71 72 

  
  
Finally, while disciples become “fishers of men” for Jesus, they never bear the weight of  
the responsibility hook, line, and sinker. Rather, disciple-makers:  
will embrace the truth that God (through Jesus) is the principal actor in the disciple- 
making process that leads to salvation…he calls people to be his disciples…he saves  
those who follow him obediently…and he imports his ongoing presence to his disciples  
for the purpose of undertaking his mission… 73    
  
Not only does this mean the pressure to disciple others falls off our shoulders, but it also means  
our discipleship processes should look a lot like Jesus’s. Which means we must now turn our  
attention to the oft-overlooked discipleship method of Jesus: asking boat loads of questions.   
  
  
  
73 

  
  
CHAPTER 3  
WHERE DID JESUS LEARN TO ASK QUESTIONS?  
JESUS’S RHETORICAL, EFFECTIVE DISCIPLESHIP STRATEGY  
  
  
  
Jesus asks a lot of questions. By most counts he asks over three hundred questions, is  
asked about one hundred eighty, and answers fewer than ten. 74  This means Jesus asks more than  
thirty times more questions than he answers. In John’s Gospel, Jesus’s first and last utterances  
are questions. 75  The first red letters of John present Jesus asking some new tagalongs, “What are  
you looking for?” At the end of the Gospel, the last bit of red ink records Jesus asking his  
disciples who are concerned about the fate of one of their own, “What is that to you?” Perhaps  
this last question inspired C.S. Lewis to put on the lips of Aslan, “‘Child,’ said the Lion, ‘I am  
telling you your story, not hers. No one is told any story but their own.’” 76  Since John takes some  
liberties that the Synoptic authors do not regarding the chronology of the life of Jesus, one safely  
assumes that the decision to open Jesus’s mouth and place in it a question at the beginning was  
just that: a decision. Whether or not the first words of Jesus John overheard were a question, he  
redacts his Gospel to make it so for the reader. Robert Alter reminds us that, “at the beginning of  
any new story, the point at which dialogue first emerges will be worthy of special attention, and  
in most instances, the initial words spoken by a personage will be revelatory, perhaps more in  
  
74 75 76 

  
  
manner than in matter, constituting an important moment in the exposition of character.” 77  Jesus  
undoubtedly said many things in John’s presence. By starting Jesus’s dialogue with a query, John  
wants his audience to know Jesus is the type of person who asks questions.   
  
While Jesus has plenty of unique attributes like being fully God and fully man, having  
been born to a virgin, and that neat walking on water thing he can do, he also possesses plenty of  
characteristics that emerge from his cultural setting. He wears a tunic and sandals rather than bell  
bottom jeans and Nikes. Jesus’s use of question-asking as a rhetorical device also demonstrates  
this reality—it is a product of his  Sitz im Leben . While scholars enjoy debating whether Greco- 
Roman or Jewish influences more heavily impact certain aspects of the New Testament people  
and practices, that debate extends beyond the scope of this thesis. Furthermore, most of the time  
those debates result in some hybrid answer that reflects the Hellenized Jewish background of  
much of the New Testament. Suffice it to say, looking at both streams of sources—Hellenic and  
Jewish—will inform our understanding about Jesus’s questions.   
  
Jesus Christ and the Philosopher’s Tome  
  
Before we can discuss rhetorical sources that might impact Jesus, we must first define our  
term rhetoric. One can hardly improve upon Ben Witherington’s definition when he states,  
“When I use the term ‘rhetoric,’ I am referring to the ancient art of persuasion used from the time  
of Aristotle onwards through and beyond the NT era in the Greek-speaking world to convince  
one audience or another about something…I am talking about all that went into convincing an  
audience about some subject.” 78  Put more simply, rhetoric is persuasive speech. We will discuss  
  
77 78 

  
  
question-asking as an instrument in persuading others. Question-asking falls under the heading  
of rhetoric when the goal of using this device is to persuade or impact the listener. Of course, not  
all questions fall under the heading “rhetoric,” as they have different purposes than persuasion. A  
person asking someone the time when trying to catch a train versus asking one’s partner the time  
with eyebrows raised at a party that ran out of pizza and Dr Pepper two hours ago has different  
agendas. The first seeks data; the second communicates persuasively. We will argue that Jesus’s  
use (and the Gospel writers’ inclusion) of question-asking falls in line with rhetoric. When an  
omniscient God asks questions, he hardly seeks answers. The first question God asks in the  
Bible—where are you?—is akin to me asking my dog Corrie if she ate my pizza crust when I  
looked away. I know, she knows I know, we are working to repair our relationship. Questions  
from God seek to do something more than elucidate information; they act upon the person. Those  
types of questions accomplish what rhetoric aims to do.    
  
Greco-Roman Rhetorical Influences  
One can hardly think of questions as part of rhetoric without one philosopher dominating  
the landscape. Afterall, he has a whole method named after him. To discuss questions as a tool in  
the rhetorician’s toolbox, Socrates comes first. 79  What most of us call the Socratic method refers  
to the ancient practice of  elenchus. 80   This practice uses an interlocutor who defines something  
  
79 80 

  
  
and then is interrogated with questions until they cry, I mean, until they admit their definition is  
incorrect. Questions, for Socrates, lead to truth—and a defeated dialogue partner. Most often  
today, people think of the “Socratic method” as asking lots of questions in the educational  
setting. Thankfully, most third-grade teachers are not actually applying the  elenchus  strategy in  
the technical sense—not enough people are trained in EMDR for that. The Socratic Method  
while bearing Socrates name, has Plato to thank for surviving all these years. Plato, a disciple of  
Socrates, applied the Socratic method in many of his works, but also contributed to ancient  
philosophy in the areas of metaphysics and epistemology. Even the most casual student of  
ancient philosophy knows who comes next: Aristotle. Socrates taught Plato who taught Aristotle,  
and this educative process was not unique to these three.   
For the Greek-speaking world, education took place in the home as well as in schools— 
typically for boys and young men at the gymnasia. Around the 5 th  century BCE, the schools  
added rhetoric to their curriculum. These schools taught Greek grammar to younger boys (7–14),  
and then theory, lectures, and famous orators to cultivate finer language skills to the older boys. 81   
Although Jewish, the apostle Paul living in a Hellenized world most likely received rhetorical  
training. His practice in Ephesus of persuading others at the Hall of Tyrannus offers a glimpse  
into praxis of his education (Acts 19:8–10). In commenting on this episode in Paul’s life, Craig  
Keener notes that Paul performed like he was a professor and not just a student of rhetoric during  
these two years. Keener offers:   
The format of more traditional schools varied: teachers could offer lectures, either formal  
(sometimes read) or informal; many philosophic schools also included “the exegesis and  
  
81 

  
  
discussion of texts”; class discussions (at times using questions and answers) were  
common; finally, teachers could dialogue with one student in front of the rest of the  
students. Both Luke and Paul lead us to expect that Paul would have used the Scriptures  
for texts and that he may have used some acceptable philosophic forms such as diatribe. 82   
  
In other words, Paul learned rhetoric so well in his schooling and was so steeped in that  
pedagogical formation that when given the opportunity in Ephesus, he created his own Christian  
school using the same tools of the Hellenized trade.   
  
The ubiquitousness of rhetorical education naturally leads to divergent opinions on how  
best to persuade others. With a plethora of schools comes a divergence of theory. We mentioned  
earlier the disagreements between philosophers on discipleship practices, and some of the  
disagreement had to do with rhetorical strategy. For Socrates and Plato, to educate or persuade a  
person involved asking questions to draw out information they already possessed, and for the  
Sophists they prefer to lecture at a person to provide knowledge. 83  Despite the debates on  how  to  
do rhetoric, the idea that a person  should  do rhetoric was a foregone conclusion. It was a key  
feature in  education in Greece and Rome, and competitions for public speaking even occurred at  
the highest levels—the Olympics. 84  One could gain the admiration of their fellow countrymen by  
either heaving a discus far, running fast, or speaking well. Placing rhetoric alongside the  
Olympic athletic competitions shows how a culture obsessed with honor viewed the field of  
rhetoric. If you cannot walk the walk, you can always talk the talk.   
  
82 83 84 

  
  
Rhetoric also included more than speaking; it involved writing. The ability to persuade  
comes from the throat and the pen. While many argue that literacy rates in the ancient world  
were abysmal, newer research is showing that people wrote and read more than we previously  
assumed. 85  For example, Seneca the Younger (4BCE–65CE) tells a story about a man being  
stabbed to death by a mob of people with their styluses—writing utensils. 86  While the story is  
clearly hyperbole, it reveals the assumption that everyday folks walked around with a pen in  
hand. It also reveals the more widespread written culture of rhetoric. Two satirists—Persius and  
Juvenal—make fun of the fact that everyone fancies himself a poet. 87  Juvenal—especially  
crabby—mocks the number of public recitations in his city and laments that these inferior  
performances are the worst part of living in Rome. 88  Rhetoric as far as the eye can see, and ear  
  
85 86 87 88 

  
  
can hear. With the plethora of training and opportunity, if a person in the first century wanted to  
persuade others, he had better have some working knowledge and practice in the art of rhetoric.   
Amidst the sea of fancy talkers and writers, we return to Aristotle, because he deserves  
special consideration. His  On Rhetoric  states that public address was morally neutral and could  
be used for good or evil,  tov  or  ra’ . To discern which depended on the character of the orator. His  
three-fold considerations included the truth and logic of the argument, the ability to persuade the  
audience, and the emotions aroused in the audience to accept what was argued. 89    
Most first year English students come to know these as the logos, ethos, and pathos of  
persuasion. Aristotle breaks with his triumvirate buddies, Socrates and Plato, and their logical  
development of questions in his later works. In his  Interpretation,  Aristotle puts forward that  
proposition of the declarative sort rather than prayers, wishes, and questions belong in academic  
study and the rest belong to rhetoric. His opinion departs from earlier educational philosophy.  
Where rhetoric was previously a featured player in the academic pursuit, Aristotle demotes it.  
For students of Aristotle, “Questions as well as other non-propositional statements, quickly  
became second-class citizens within the kingdoms of language, philosophy, and science.” 90    
Looking at much of the education system in America, one easily sees Aristotle’s  
fingerprints. As we mentioned earlier, children in the US primarily learn through propositional  
declarations. 91    
  
89 90 91 

  
  
  
Jesus must not have read much Aristotle. Despite Aristotle’s demotion of rhetoric, the  
world around Jesus included public speaking, communal reading, and even competitions for the  
ability to speak persuasively. If Jesus wanted to reach the crowds, he would need to appropriate  
some of this Greco-Roman culture into his communication.   
In his book  Moral Exhortation , Malherbe begins, “The moral teaching of the early  
Christians in many ways resembled that of their pagan neighbors…Modern scholars have shown  
that already the earliest Christian writers, represented in this book by the New Testament and the  
apostolic fathers were considerably indebted to their pagan predecessors and contemporaries for  
how and what they taught.” 92  Notice his inclusion of  how  they taught.   
How exactly did the Greeks and the Romans teach? According to Malherbe, it was  
through public discourse. These communal reading events took place in public spaces as well as  
in the homes of the wealthy, which led to the accessibility of the information for the masses.  
Malherbe argues that this commonness of the public discourse events—meeting the people  
where they were—contributed to the spread of ideas.   
One might press too far into Hellenistic rhetorical sources if she concludes Plato had a  
greater influence on Jesus than the Pentateuch. Yet the fact remains that Jesus spoke as an  
itinerant prophet and preacher claiming the Kingdom of God was at hand. He went even further  
and claimed to be God.   
Jesus would need more than flat, dull speech to convince people of his true identity.  
Jesus’s use of chreia, fable (parable), enconmium, vituperation, syncrisis, and other rhetorical  
strategies allowed him to compete for the attention of the masses among the cacophony of voices  
  
92 

  
  
in his day. 93  Jesus’s use of questions to persuade and impact his listener would have placed him  
squarely among the other rhetoricians. While the content of his message differed greatly from  
that of Plato and Juvenal, his delivery, at times, looked like the deliveries of these ancient  
philosophers and writers. Lest you think, though, that Jesus would have been seen as completely  
Hellenized, he also would reflected his Jewish upbring as well.   
  
Jewish Sources  
  
People sometimes mistakenly equate Jesus’s rhetorical questions with later Rabbinic  
traditions such as the Talmud. Their assumption fails to take into consideration a couple of  
factors. First, there is no monolithic tradition of question-asking in the Talmud that one could  
describe as “Rabbinic.” The later Babylonian Talmud has a much more developed question  
format than the earlier material. When comparing Bavli’s arguments (Babylonian) to earlier  
ones, “the style of its discourse, the character of its literary units, the flow of the text—all differ  
markedly from its Palestinian counterpart. A span of 200-300 years, however, is ample time for  
styles, interests, and values to change along with shifting social, political, economic, and cultural  
circumstances.” 94  In other words, the later Talmud—further from Jesus than the earlier iterations  
of it—more closely resembles the style we see in the Gospels. Second, instead of influencing  
  
93 94 

  
  
Jesus, the Hebraic thought of the Talmud most likely  was  influenced by Hellenized rhetoric. The  
Rabbis argue similarly to Plato and Aristotle in its more developed places. 95  Where the Talmud  
sounds like Jesus, we might also find Greek flavors, which accounts for their similarities. Rather  
than looking at later Jewish sources and importing them back into the life of Christ, one must see  
that a much stronger and contemporaneous Jewish influence played a part in Jesus’s life: the  
synagogue.  
Jesus grew up attending the synagogue and the writers of the Synoptic Gospels place  
Jesus in the synagogue when he initiates his public ministry (Matt 4:23, Mark 1:14, Luke 4:15). 96   
The way those in the synagogue taught and persuaded would impact Jesus’s communicative  
formation. Within the assembly Josephus writes, “the seventh day we set apart from labor; it is  
dedicated to the learning of our customs and laws, we thinking it proper to reflect on them as  
well as on any [good] thing else, in order to avoid our sinning.” 97  The assembly both read the  
customs and laws, and they reflected on them. The reflection time gets more detail in Philo. He  
adds to this picture when he writes:   
Now these laws are taught at other times, indeed, but most especially on the seventh day,  
for the seventh day is accounted sacred, on which they abstain from all other  
employments, and frequent the sacred places which are called synagogues, and there they  
sit according to their age in classes, the younger sitting under the elder, and listening with  
eager attention in becoming order. Then one, indeed, takes up the holy volume and reads  
  
95 96 97 

  
  
it, and another of the men of the greatest experience comes forward and explains what is  
not very intelligible, for a great many precepts are delivered in enigmatical modes of  
expression, and allegorically, as the old fashion. 98   
  
Notice in both Josephus and Philo the reference to reflection and explanation. Not only does  
public reading of Hebrew Bible take place, but there is an expectation of discussion and  
exposition. This reality explains why Jesus could so easily (at least in the beginning) enter the  
synagogues and speak to the assembly (Luke 4) during his public itinerant ministry. The practice  
of reciting a Law and then expounding on it gets repeated by Jesus most obviously in his “you  
have heard it said, but I say” pattern throughout the Sermon on the Mount (Matt 5–7). When  
looking at the literary sources that describe the synagogue gathering from Josephus, Philo,  
Qumran, Luke, and Acts, Carl Mosser concludes, “the main activity in the Sabbath gathering  
after the reading of the Law and the Prophets was not a sermon, but open discussion among  
Jewish men. During this time, it appears that anyone could offer insights or dispute the  
interpretive claims of others.” 99  This disputative posture when it comes to religious and national  
discussions clearly influenced Jesus’s interactions with the Pharisees and other religious and  
national leaders. Halakhic arguments pepper the Gospel dialogues. Rhetoric—attempt at  
persuasion—through the debate and dialogue model took place in the synagogues of Jesus’s day  
and account for his engagement in those same practices in his ministry.   
  
To really drive home this point about disputative and questioning practices within Jesus’s  
synagogue formation, one need not look further than his pre-pubescent years. Before Jesus went  
to prom, he spent time questioning and discussing the Torah with Jerusalem’s religious leaders.  
  
98 99 

  
  
When looking at all four Gospels, one learns very little about Jesus’s life prior to his baptism and  
public ministry—both events which took place in his adulthood. Interestingly, Luke includes a  
story that the other Gospel writers omit from his childhood. After traveling to Jerusalem from  
Nazareth to celebrate the Passover, Jesus’s parents realize deep into the return trip that their boy  
is missing from the caravan. 100  After three nerve-wracking days, Mary and Jospeh find Jesus at  
the “temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and  asking them questions ”  
(Luke 2:46, emphasis mine). 101    
It is fun to think about all the things Jesus might have done as a child: play hide and seek  
with his siblings (even though his omniscience gave him an advantage), learn the carpentry craft  
from his earthly father (and cry out to his heavenly father when he accidentally hammered his  
thumb), and sing from the psalter (knowing Psalm 2 was actually about himself). Luke, and the  
rest of the Gospel authors, exclude any stories like these from his early years. Instead, the only  
story from Jesus’s childhood presents him asking questions of religious leaders.   
Does this moment in Jesus’s childhood make him unique? Not exactly. Rather “the  
account the twelve-year-old in the Temple tells us not only that Jews were serious about  
educating their children, but they were also serious about listening to them. Children are not to  
be ‘seen and not heard’; they are to be fully part of the family, and the community.” 102  Jesus’s  
  
100 101 102 

  
  
Jewish upbringing taught him that question-asking played a part in religious formation. As  
already mentioned, the first words of any character in a story carry a great deal of significance.  
In Luke’s Gospel, Jesus’s first words are a gentle rebuke of his parents with a question for not  
understanding that his purpose demanded he participate in these types of discussions. In response  
to Mary’s anguish, Jesus makes a:   
crucial remark about the necessity of his involvement with religious discussion like that  
at the temple. His sonship demanded it. Such self-understanding the parents could not  
comprehend, nor did they perceive as yet Jesus’ total sense of priorities toward the things  
of the Father. Yet the event is but a foretaste of Jesus’ later ministry. 103    
  
Luke includes this story as a hint of what would come of Jesus’s public ministry life. From the  
beginning, Jesus saw question-asking as part of the formative practices of religious conversation.   
  
So far, we have discussed the Greco-Roman and Jewish sources that influenced Jesus’s  
rhetorical strategy preserved by the Gospel writers. When it comes to debate and religious  
dialogue, we can credit Sophists and the synagogue. Yet, some of Jesus’s most penetrating  
questions do not involve two parties in a debate. Sometimes, Jesus, without debate or dialogue,  
asked open-ended questions to the crowds. Therefore, we must keep asking, “Where did he learn  
to ask good questions?”   
  
Hebrew Bible as the Source  
  
He got it from his dad. Question-asking to persuade, rebuke, invite, and elicit many other  
emotions happens throughout the Hebrew Bible. Before Matthew, we had Malachi and Moses.  
And the Hebrew Bible explodes with rhetoric meant “to carry away the audience; to produce an  
  
103 

  
  
effect on them; to leave them different as a result of the impact of the words.” 104  If we step back  
and realize that God employs rhetoric in communicating to humanity we come to realize some  
important truths about his relationship to his image bearers.   
God exhaled and suddenly the Milky Way, elephants, and narwhals existed. His speech  
creates. It also destroys. A whisper from God can crush a cedar (Ps 29:3). With so much majesty,  
power, and causation, God could speak definitively and force his will upon humanity.   
Yet, the commands of God can be disobeyed. God restrains his power when he speaks to  
humanity. Instead, he welcomes humans into dialogue with him. This means, “when God seeks  
to appeal to His human addresses, He actually shares with them His concerns, expecting them to  
accept His authority in light of His reasoning in human dialectical terms and not just because he  
is God.” 105    
God persuades through his rhetoric not his might. Although sometimes he does display  
his might, God draws humans into his desires through rhetoric. Take for example God’s  
interaction with Cain prior to the fratricide (Gen 4). God could berate Cain for his anger,  
discipline Cain with no speech, or make Cain obey with a “Let there be goodness in Cain’s  
motives” like he does for the boundaries of the sun and sea. Instead, God asks Cain a series of  
questions meant to persuade Cain to do good. Interestingly, God speaks to Cain and not Abel or  
even Cain’s parents, “rather God chooses to speak to Cain, attempting to save him from the sin  
of fratricide that he is about to commit. He invites Cain to choose…”. 106    
  
104 105 106 

  
  
God attempts to sway Cain through language, giving him meaningful choice while  
tipping the scales toward the good. The series of questions here echoes the earlier scene where  
the snake asks Eve a series of questions. “In both cases the questioners know the answer to their  
own question, but whereas the snake’s was designed to lead man into sin, God’s were intended to  
provoke a change of heart.” 107  Cain, tragically, ignores the scales and murders Abel—but the fact  
that both the tempter and God employed question-asking as a means to persuade their  
interlocutor shows the power of this rhetorical device. Although the story is horrifying, it reveals  
a pattern throughout the Scriptures—God uses questions to impact us.   
  
One recurring design of question-asking in the Hebrew Bible is known as the  modus  
tollens,  which strengthens the question by denying the antecedent. 108  For example, “How could I  
love LeBron more than I already do?” This question works by denying the premise. The  
rhetorical thrust communicates I could not love LeBron more if I tried.  When God asks  
Abraham and Sarah, “Is anything too hard for the Lord?” (Gen 18:14) the question works by  
communicating that nothing is too hard for the Lord. It invites Abraham and Sarah to consider  
what they already know to be true about God’s power. This type of question forces the listener to  
confront the false premise of their standpoint that the question-asker makes explicit. Abraham  
and Sarah doubted; God’s question implicitly names the doubt and explicitly asks them to  
reconsider. 109    
  
107 108 109 

  
  
This begs the question, “what is accomplished by phrasing a premise indirectly in the  
form of a rhetorical question, when it could have been more straightforwardly expressed as a  
simple assertion. [sic] The answer lies in the strengthening effect of the rhetorical question. As  
compared to the equivalent declarative clause, the rhetorical question is more forceful.” 110  I  
could simply say, “I love LeBron” which carries some declarative force. But, if I were to ask, “Is  
there a greater love than what I have for LeBron?” the listener intuits that I have ratcheted up the  
intensity of affection. Again, God intends to impact the listener with speech and employs rhetoric  
to do so. Could God be a better communicator?  
  
God both uses questions to help others reconsider their perspective, and also, through the  
prophets, uses questions to bring accusation against the Israelites. Jeremiah especially employs  
rhetorical questions to highlight their foolishness. By asking 1) Is Israel a slave? (2:14); 2) Has  
God been a wilderness to Israel? (2:31); 3) Will God be angry forever? (3:5); and 4) When men  
fall, do they not rise again? (8:4) Jeremiah establishes a common base with the listener.  
However, he only creates a common base so he can flip it on the listeners. 1) If you are free, why  
are you now war booty?; 2) If God has treated you with abundance, why has he now abandoned  
you?; 3) If Yahweh is forgiving, why have you continued to do evil to endure his continued  
wrath?; 4) And, if one always returns to the path, why are you still lost in the sauce? (paraphrase,  
of course). 111    
  
110 111 

  
  
For Jeremiah, the questions draw the listeners in by creating shared space. Once they  
agree upon the premise, the premise is flipped and becomes accusation. “Corrie, does Nika not  
always sneak you her pizza crust when the other roommates are not looking? Yes…then why  
would you steal from the hand that feeds?”   
A line of questioning followed by accusation permeates the book of Jeremiah with the  
result that the rhetorical device is a “frontal attack on the entire religious enterprise and world- 
view of his contemporaries. Jeremiah is the one who sees exile as the inevitable result of this  
way of living and religion, and therefore his dispute is with the entire establishment which has  
misunderstood and presumed upon Yahweh.” 112    
A full-frontal attack through question-asking certainly falls under rhetoric. The questions  
aim to wound, but wound so they may heal. God sends the prophets to speak for him. Jeremiah’s  
questions, while harsh, speak to the seriousness of Israel’s sin and inevitable exile. What would it  
sound like to try to wake up a nation ignoring God’s commands?   
  
So far, we have focused on asking questions that correct or rebuke. But God also uses  
questions to invite his people to express pain or anger. In the wilderness Hagar—slave to Sarah  
and Abraham—despairs of her life because of her mistreatment. God—although omniscient— 
asks Hagar where she has come from and where she is going. 113  This is the first time that God  
asks someone where they are since Genesis 4, and it is the first time Hagar’s name, rather than  
  
112 113 

  
  
her status as a slave is used in the text. 114  God sees Hagar and blesses her, and the account, “is a  
beautiful story of God coming to the rescue of the marginalized and the social outcast.” 115  “His  
question invites greater intimacy, not rebuke. 116  This tender scene between God and a runaway  
enslaved woman begins by a question that invites Hagar to share her pain with God. 117  “Hagar,  
slave of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?” 118  beckons, and as a result,  
Hagar experiences a God of tenderness, mercy, and generosity by responding to the question  
with telling God about her heartache. After this tender moment, God announces He will make  
Hagar the mother of a multitude—blessings reserved for the Patriarchs. Questions invite.  
  
Questions also teach. If a person took a blue highlighter to all the questions of God in the  
Hebrew Bible, the end of Job would look like an ocean. The book of Job starts with a righteous  
man who—in a rather bizarre moment in Scripture—becomes the center of a wager between God  
and an accuser. Does Job worship and obey God because of the rewards or because Job actually  
loves God? To find out, the accuser puts Job through some of the most painful and grievous  
experiences one can imagine.   
  
114 115 116 117 118 

  
  
At first, Job continues to declare his love of Yahweh, but then readers catch a glimpse of  
Job’s inner dialogue: he curses the day he was born. Who could blame him? Then Job’s buddies  
visit the suffering man and heap more misery upon him by accusing him of doing evil which  
brought about his suffering. Who needs enemies when you have friends like Job’s? Job knows  
his own innocence, so in a moment of great pain and despair, Job accuses God of treating him  
unjustly and demands an answer for why his life has turned to ruin.   
We need the blue highlighter for what follows. God answers Job with seventy-seven  
questions. At first glance, the questions might seem inconsiderate, if not cruel. Why are my  
children dead? Have you seen a Billy goat bah? Upon more meditation, though, God’s questions  
invite Job to consider a bigger perspective. Francis Andersen, commenting on the “deluge of  
counter-questions” is worth quoting at length. He writes:  
The sustained interrogation is not just a formal peculiarity. The function of the questions  
needs to be properly understood. As a rhetorical device, a question can be another way of  
making a pronouncement, much favoured by orators. For Job, the questions in the Lord’s  
speeches are not such roundabout statements of fact; they are invitations, suggestions  
about discoveries he will make as he tries to find his own answers. They are not  
catechetical, as if Job’s knowledge is being tested. They are educative, in the true and  
original meaning of that term…Their initial effect of driving home to Job his ignorance is  
not intended to humiliate him. On the contrary the highest nobility of every person is to  
be thus enrolled by God himself in the school of Wisdom…For Job the exciting  
discoveries to which God leads him bring a giant advance in knowledge,  knowledge of  
himself and of God, for the two always go together in the Bible  (emphasis mine). 119   
  
Job wants answers; God offers questions. Rather than dismissing Job’s questions, though, God’s  
counter-questions teach Job of mysteries and knowledge beyond Job’s reach. These questions  
gently nudge Job to consider that the reason behind suffering might be beyond the grasp of  
human understanding. The world God presents to Job in the questions has a complexity beyond  
  
119 

  
  
human comprehension which leads Job and the reader to realize, even if God answered Job,  
humanity would not understand. Some things are beyond our reach. Rather than God rebuking  
Job and saying, “you puny human, I have forgotten more about quarks than you will ever learn,”  
God’s questions invite Job (and the reader) into pondering God’s wisdom. His questions turn  
human eyes to a world bigger and more majestic than we can comprehend. God might not have  
answered Job, but he does teach him. Questions instruct.   
  
We could continue with examples from the Hebrew Bible, but the main point of this  
chapter is about the questions of Jesus. From all these sources we can draw a few conclusions  
things about Jesus’s rhetorical use of question-asking in the Gospels. For starters, Jesus’s  
question-asking proves very effective in his Hellenized context .  A world that prioritizes rhetoric,  
means the rhetorical flair of Jesus allows him to hold court amongst the orators, annoying  
Juvenal. Yet, while Jesus would sway many with a worldview-disrupting message, he would  
most likely credit his Father, not philosophers for his particular style. The questions of Jesus  
continue the long tradition of God’s rhetoric to sway, comfort, rebuke, and encourage. Jesus talks  
like his dad. Why don’t we?   
As mentioned earlier, one of the major factors in our identity formation is understanding  
that humanity bears God’s image. Of course we should be like Jesus, and Jesus asks a lot of  
questions. This should compel us to ask more questions. But, should we not also ask more  
questions because we bear the image of a God we discover in the Hebrew Bible who asks a lot of  
questions? Do the questions of God in the Hebrew Bible compel us to ask more questions, too? If  
not, why not? Jesus gets it from his father, so should we.    
  
  


  
  
Jesus Uses Rhetoric  
  
Jesus—a human who lived in the first century—had at his disposal several rhetorical  
devices and strategies that Plato and Juvenal also used. His use of well-known rhetorical devices  
and strategies demonstrates that Jesus intended to persuade and impact others with his speech.  
However, growing up Jewish meant Jesus also understood the long tradition from the Hebrew  
Bible and practices of the synagogue. When looking at the questions Yahweh asks, Jesus looks a  
whole lot like his dad. Whether a person within ear shot of the Sermon on the Mount thought  
Jesus sounded like Socrates or Solomon, they undoubtedly thought he aimed to  do  something to  
his audience. The listener knows rhetoric when they hear it, and Jesus’s particular style made him  
effective. Even those who flatly rejected his message, did so with anger and frustration—his  
speech had made its impact. For those who accepted his message, many left their careers and  
family to follow him. While more than rhetoric went into persuading a person to give up their  
entire lives to follow a poor man from Nazareth who claimed to be God, it still helped. Maybe  
rhetoric might help to still convince people today.   
If Jesus asks questions, so should Christians. Furthermore, Christians should ask  
questions that have impact upon the listeners like Jesus’s did. When we do so, we look a whole  
lot like the trinitarian God whose image we bear. With the advent of social media, television,  
radio, and the 24/7 onslaught of communication in our pockets, we would be wise to learn a few  
rhetorical strategies that aim to persuade. If Juvenal thought he had it bad in first-century Rome,  
he should swipe through TikTok for an hour. He might kiss the cobble stones near the newly built  
Colosseum in gratitude if he did.    


  
  
Avoid manipulation, of course, but looking more like Jesus in our discipleship strategies  
might help aid in their effectiveness. In the next chapter we will look at a sample of Jesus’s  
questions and how they impacted those around him.  
  
  


  
  
CHAPTER 4  
JESUS’S IDENTITY-FORMING QUESITONS:  
A SAMPLE OF EXAMPLE  
  
  
  
If Jesus asks questions, so should Christians. Furthermore, Christians should ask  
questions that have impact upon the listeners like Jesus’s did. Below we will consider a few  
questions Jesus asked and how the questions impacted the identity formation of the listener. We  
will see how the questions of Jesus help form the listeners’ understanding of God, himself, and  
others.   
  
Who is God?  
Jesus’s question of greatest importance was probably when he looked at his disciples and  
asked them, “Who do you say that I am?” (Matt 16:13–16, Mark 8:27–29, Luke 9:18–20). The  
impact of this question must have lingered, as all three Synoptic writers included this moment in  
their Gospels. Prior to asking the disciples this pointed question, Jesus asks more generally  
“What’s the word on the street about me?” The responses included a who’s who of prophets. But  
then the Greek intensifies with a contrastive  δε  and an emphatic  ῾υμει  providing a poignant “but  
y’all, who do y’all say that I am?”   
With this question, “Jesus turns attention away from the general public with its casual  
contacts and its imperfect loyalty and understanding and asks how it was with the men who were  
his closest followers.” 120  This question hangs in the air until Peter answers on behalf of the  
  
120 

  
  
group—something he does often. 121  Peter’s declaration that Jesus was in fact the Messiah, the  
Son of the Living God, reveals that for the disciples, they were wrestling with their  
understanding of Yahweh and the Messiah whom God said would come. Who is God? He might  
be standing in front of them wearing sandals and chewing on a piece of barley bread. This  
question plays a crucial role in the discipleship process not just for the original twelve, but for all  
subsequent disciples of Jesus. To truly follow Jesus, you must answer for yourself who he is. Is  
he a prophet? Is he a miracle worker? Or, is Jesus God? With this question, Jesus invites his  
disciples to come to grips with a reality they must have been wrestling with after the feedings,  
healings, teachings, and exorcisms. By asking, though, Jesus drives the wrestling to give way to  
declaration. Jesus’s question shapes their understanding of God’s identity—he walks with them  
through Galilee.   
Throughout Jesus’s public ministry, he heals people suffering from leprosy, blindness,  
lameness, hemorrhaging blood, and all sorts of conditions that not only cause physical suffering  
but social suffering. 122  Rather than simply healing the people, Jesus often asked them questions  
before alleviating their pain. These questions draw the recipient of the miracle into a great  
intimacy with Jesus.   
Take for example Jesus encountering two blind men as recorded in the Gospel of  
Matthew (9:27–31). The two men ask the “Son of David” to heal them. Jesus asks them in  
response, “Do you believe I can do this?” By using the title, “Son of David” the two men reveal  
that they believe Jesus to be the long-expected Messiah. Jesus’s question, though, invites them to  
  
121 122 

  
  
really consider—do they have faith that Jesus is more than a miracle worker—do you really  
believe I am the Messiah? Lots of people demanded a sign from Jesus, but “the prerequisite faith  
of these individuals distinguished them from the evil and adulterous generation that constantly  
demanded a sign to prove Jesus’s claims only to persist in their rejection of him even after  
witnessing his amazing miracles.” 123  The two men express their faith in Jesus, and he says their  
faith has healed them.   
Jesus’s question beckoned them to wrestle with their understanding of God’s identity. The  
same question confronts readers of Matthew’s Gospel today. When Jesus asked the two blind  
men his question, “he is implicitly asking us the same question or questions: Do you believe I am  
the Son of God? Do you believe that I have divine power? In short, do you believe that nothing is  
impossible with God? These are essential questions encountering Jesus in the Bible.” 124  Jesus’s  
miracles do not depend on the faith of the recipient. In fact, often in the face of doubt Jesus  
performs his greatest miracles, like rising from the dead. The questions Jesus posed to those who  
needed a miracle create opportunities to wrestle with our belief in God. They form us as they ask  
us to consider what we believe about Jesus and his Messianic claims.  
  
Who am I?  
  
Jesus not only calls his followers to wrestle with God’s identity, but he also asks them to  
consider more deeply our own identities. My favorite question Jesus asks he directs at Peter after  
the resurrection. On a beach with fire crackling (John 21:15–14) Peter walks up to Jesus on the  
  
123 124 

  
  
shore after jumping from the boat. He stands dripping near hot embers, and one wonders if they  
remind Peter of the ones he used to warm himself before he denied being a disciple of Jesus  
(John 18:15–18). From John’s storytelling point of view, this is the first time Peter and Jesus  
speak to each other since the denial, death, and burial of Jesus. What must Peter have felt in this  
moment? Shame? Regret? Fear? Jesus looks Peter in the eyes and asks, “Simon, do you love  
me?” Peter says yes. Jesus asks again. Peter says yes. Jesus asks a third time. Peter replies,  
“Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you.”   
On the night of Jesus’s death, “Peter did not acquit himself well on that occasion, denying  
three times that he was a disciple of Jesus. Jesus now gives him the opportunity to answer a  
different set of questions, a set equally aimed at testing his faithfulness to Jesus.” 125  Peter denied  
Jesus three times, and Jesus asks for a recommitment three times. Disciples fail. Peter failed. Yet,  
Jesus uses these questions to give Peter an opportunity to renew his commitment and reshape his  
understanding of himself.   
Peter sees the risen Christ sitting in front of him, and he knows he denied the savior that  
painful Friday night. But now the savior welcomes him back with questions that invite renewed  
intimacy. After the questions, the Lord asks Peter to feed Jesus’s sheep and to “follow” after  
Jesus as a disciple would. These questions both restore Peter to Jesus, and give Jesus an  
opportunity to shape Peter’s identity—not as the one who fell away, but as the one Jesus asks to  
shepherd others.   
If you would have asked Peter while sitting on that boat unable to catch any fish, “Who  
are you, Peter?” you might have heard phrases like failure, lost, broken. After this question-and- 
  
125 

  
  
answer session with Jesus, you would get a different answer. Peter, who are you? This answer  
includes words like restored, shepherd, disciple. The Lord’s questions help Peter to reframe his  
relationship to Jesus. Yes, Peter denied him. Yet the final word is not rejection, but restoration.  
Jesus’s questions shape our self-identities.   
  
Jesus’s most frequent question, “What do you want me to do for you?” confronts readers  
still today. If someone asks you, “Who are you?” they might learn about your occupation, family  
connections, or your Enneagram number. Answering “Who are you?” requires vulnerability, but  
we can easily sidestep the vulnerability by answering with data that pertains to what we do and  
who we belong to. It is like pulling up your house on Zillow and showing the outside and staged  
photos before you moved in. The unmade bed, couches covered in dog hair, and dirty dishes  
never get shown.   
The question, “What do you want me to do for you?” demands that we discuss the dirty  
laundry. It penetrates to the deepest recesses of our hopes, pains, disappointments, and fears.  
“Who are you?” asks for descriptions, but “What do you want?” sneaks past the pristine picture  
we project into the world and invites us to name the most tender parts of ourselves.   
Jesus asks this question of the mother of the Sons of Thunder and hears they want to sit at  
the right hand of Jesus. What do you want? Power. Jesus asks this question of the blind beggar.  
What do you want? Have pity on me, I want to see. This story of the blind beggar in both Mark  
and Luke occurs soon after Jesus is asked by the rich young ruler what he must do to enter  
heaven. The implicit question here, what do you want? Eternal life  and  be rich when I get there.  
The question “What do you want?”:  
requires reflection, not a hasty response. Do we want to sit beside God in heaven in  
powerful domination over others, like the selfish male disciples did? Do we want eternal  
life as if it is our rightful inheritance, as if we deserve it, as if we are the great, worthy  


  
  
elite? Or do we recognize our poverty, brokenness, helplessness, and blindness—our need  
for God, our need for vision—and want simply to see again, to see God face-to-face? 126   
  
Jesus’s question stops the hustle and bustle of life and demands we consider what we most want  
in life. Our answer to this question may reveal our identity or sometimes even our idols. If we  
asked every Christian we knew to take a moment and consider how they would respond if Jesus  
asked them, “What do you want me to do for you?” we would learn more about those people  
answering that one question than from an hour’s worth of ice-breakers. Jesus’s questions force us  
to wrestle with our own identity. Where do I hurt? What do I seek? What hinders me from  
following God? Jesus’s questions help reveal and shape our identity.   
  
Who Are Others?  
  
 One of the ways Jesus’s questions impacted people is they counter enculturated  
consciousness. 127  In other words, his questions shape our deep seated, often unquestioned, views  
that we absorb during our formative years from our culture and traditions. Jesus’s use of  
questions “sought to crack conventional thinking and move people toward kingdom ways of  
thinking; from thinking dominated by culture to a worldview centered on God.” 128  If discipleship  
should form our identities, Jesus’s questions help chisel away our former selves and fashion us  
into new-creation people.   
New-creation people think differently about how to view our neighbors. Our enculturated  
consciousness often tells us the kind of people we should prioritize and the kinds we ignore.  
  
126 127 128 

  
  
Such ignoring or even distaining can happen on harmless levels—such as my disgust at the color  
burnt orange because Longhorns are not my people. I am a Sooner. Far too often, though, the  
unconscious beliefs we inherit bear far more insidious fruit such as xenophobia, misogyny, and  
racism. Jesus’s questions take aim at those unquestioned discriminatory thoughts.   
The Good Samaritan pericope highlights this phenomenon well. In one of Jesus’s classic  
“answer a question with a question” moments, a teacher of the law asks about eternal life, and  
Jesus basically responds with, “You tell me.” “Love God, love your neighbor” comes the retort.  
Jesus commends the man, but he never learned when to hold them and when to fold them. He  
goes for broke. “Who is my neighbor?” on the lips of the lawyer challenges Jesus’s  
understanding of the Law. 129  Jesus’s response takes aim at the enculturated consciousness of the  
lawyer and the listeners of this exchange. The Lawyer, “has in mind a particular definition of a  
neighbor that concurs with his sense of self-righteousness. In response, Jesus tells a parable that  
turns his question on its head and gets at the crux of the matter.” 130    
If Jesus simply wanted to teach neighborliness, the hero of the story would be Jewish.  
Yet, the only person to do good in Jesus’s parable was a Samaritan—half Jewish, half Gentile—a  
member of a people group who many Jews loved to despise. By starting with a priest, and then a  
Levite, then turning to a Samaritan, Jesus moved “from the top of religious respectability…down  
to the bottom of racial disrespectability, heightening the narrative tension.” 131    
  
129 130 131 

  
  
Jesus knows exactly what he is doing when he then turns the story back to the Lawyer.  
Which of these three was being a neighbor to this poor man? The question does more than teach  
neighborliness, it shapes his disciples understanding of the “other.” Who is my neighbor takes on  
new dimensions that shape our understanding of the identity of others.   
Jesus’s question as recorded in Luke 10 clearly strikes a nerve with the expert of the Law.  
His response to Jesus, to evade saying “Samaritan” and instead offer “the merciful one,” displays  
his disgust for the whole story. Luke, by including the narrative, wants to do more than simply  
re-tell a story about Jesus juking a law expert. Luke wants to impact the reader, too. Not only  
does Luke want this, but all four of the Gospel writers want this as well. They record the  
questions of Jesus which “function naturally in advancing the dialogue and in shaping  
characterizations. Rhetorically, however, they function to engage us, the readers or hearers, to  
cause us to evaluate our responses in light of the disciples in the Gospel, and to help us reflect on  
Jesus and his ministry as the good news.” 132  The expert in the Law in the story of the Good  
Samaritan must deal with his feelings about Samaritans, but by including this story with its  
question, “Who is a true neighbor?” readers have to deal with our biases—whether ethnic,  
political, or religious. Defining one’s neighbor shapes disciples through all the centuries.   
  
Questions Have Impact  
  
Above we looked at just a few questions of Jesus. Hundreds more in the Gospels deserve  
consideration. Several authors wrote books that focus entirely on the questions of Jesus. 133  Each  
  
132 133 

  
  
of the authors, testifies that meditating on the questions proved fruitful in their spiritual  
formation. John Dear wrote about sitting with the questions of Jesus: “the key in every instance  
is to hear what Jesus is asking, to feel the love with which he asks his question, to sit with his  
question and let it penetrate our hearts and minds. My hope is that you will let these great  
questions sink in, touch your heart, and lead you closer to God.” 134  Elizabeth Dias wants readers  
to see how Jesus’s “questions, like the parables, fly under our mental radar right in, ‘dividing  
bones and marrow,’ challenging us not just to answer but to ask why the question needed to be  
posed at all.” 135  Martin Copenhaver discusses his church’s small-group reading one hundred fifty  
questions of Jesus outside of their scriptural context and simply reflecting upon the questions. He  
remarked, “It was as if spending time with the questions, so central to Jesus’ ministry, was a way  
to spend time with Jesus, and we wanted to linger there for a time. Not all of the questions are  
easy to hear, however. Jesus’ questions have the power both to comfort and to challenge.” 136    
Michael Buckley when reflecting on Jesus’s question-asking habit, states the, “question  
may actually turn human beings reflexively back upon themselves—upon the experiences and  
commitments and beliefs that are taken to be there already but that cry out for understanding and  
meaning, upon a store of habits, convictions, data, decisions, and challenges.” 137    
All of these authors spent considerable time and energy thinking about, researching, and  
writing about the questions of Jesus. They approached their projects from different angles and  
  
134 135 136 137 

  
  
had different goals, but each of them reported that the questions of Jesus impacted them in  
significant ways. The questions brought them closer to God, challenged them, made them  
introspective, comforted them, and caused them to reconsider long-held commitments and  
beliefs. The questions of Jesus shape our identities.   
With all this data, ignoring question-asking in the discipleship process is more than an  
oversight. It borders on malpractice. If the goal of discipleship is to form people into greater  
understanding of God, themselves, and others and the model for discipleship is Jesus, we need to  
ask more questions.   
In the next chapter, we will discuss a project that aims to prove that questions form  
people and offers a reproducible model for other disciple makers.   
  
  


  
  
CHAPTER 5  
PROJECT DESIGN:  
DOES ASKING AND ANSWERING QUESITONS IMPACT IDENTITY FORMATION?  
   
  
  
  
Jesus used questions as a rhetorical strategy to help shape the identity of his listeners, and  
the project described below aimed to mimic his practice. With the design of this project, I set out  
to answer a few questions: If Jesus asked questions that impacted his listeners, how might we  
duplicate this practice today? What would be the impact, if any, upon participants in an  
experiment that asked them to answer questions devoid of any teaching element, spiritual  
disciplines, or pastoral guidance? Can we ask questions that, by the mere asking of them,  
improve a person’s relationship with God, herself, and others?   
Admittedly, this experiment fails to completely replicate Jesus’s model, as he used  
questions as part of storytelling, within conversations, while teaching, and during public  
speeches. Jesus asked questions organically within his rhetorical events or as the opportunity  
arose. This project extracts questions from typical conversation and forces the participants to  
answer without any other verbal context. While this means we might not fully imitate Jesus’s  
practice, it does give us an advantage in this experiment. If we can isolate questions and look for  
any changes in the person’s understanding of God, herself, and others, we can conclude that  
questions alone play a part in the discipleship process. The big driving question is simple: does  
asking questions impact identity formation? As you will see below, it does.   
  
  
  


  
  
The Project Design  
  
After advertising the opportunity at St Jude through Sunday morning announcements and  
the Instagram account, participants and I gathered at the church offices for an evening where I  
briefly lectured before explaining the design of the experiment. As I mentioned in the ministry  
context section, we started every class the same way by me asking, “What is the goal of all  
Christian instruction?” and the class responds “worship.” 138  The attendees gathered into two  
groups and answered the question: If you could see God face to face right now, what is one thing  
you would thank him for? After that discussion they remained in their groups and then they  
answered the question “What is the best question you have ever been asked?” I wanted both to  
get them in a posture of worship and to think about how powerful questions can be in their own  
lives.  
  
Next, I briefly exegeted Matthew 28:18–20 with the information found in Chapter 2 of  
this thesis. The main points I discussed were identity formation, baptism as identity formation,  
and the overemphasis on teaching to the neglect of other methods of discipleship. I admitted my  
own default method was to lecture instead of asking questions. I confessed that I forced myself  
to add questions and discussion into our gathering times rather than naturally gravitate in that  
direction. I contrasted the default model of teaching and lecturing in most churches to that of  
Jesus’s methods found in the Gospels. I informed the class that while Jesus did have large  
sections of teaching, he also asks more than three hundred questions and answers only about  
three of them. This begged the question: Is Jesus the Riddler? (Enter sympathy laughs from my  
class.)   
  
138 

  
  
I then transitioned to the material found in Chapter 3 of this thesis: rhetorical strategy and  
impact. I explained how Jesus’s questions acted upon the listener, and the question-answering  
part of Jesus’s discipleship strategy interested me the most. I then highlighted and discussed  
three questions in the book of John. The following is a brief sketch of my comments: 139   
 Let’s look at a couple of examples of Jesus’s questions in the book of John. I want us to  
think about what he's doing with the question—not so much what he's asking, but what he hopes  
to accomplish by asking that question.   
The first words of Jesus in The Gospel of John (1:35–38) are a question. He asks his new  
followers, “What do you seek?”  One commentor remarked it is as if Jesus asks, “What is it you  
are longing for?” Imagine yourself in the first century. You have been following John, and he  
very prophetically claims the Messiah is near. Then he tells you, “You see my cousin over there?  
He’s the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.” So, now you decide to follow Jesus  
because he may or may not be the Messiah. Then he asks you, “What are you longing for?” So,  
let me ask you, What is he hoping to accomplish with that question? If Jesus turned to you right  
now and asked you, “What is it you long for?” how might that question impact you?  
A little bit later in the Gospel of John (5:41–44) Jesus talks to a Pharisee. Now, if you  
have not been at St Jude, you might not have heard my teaching on the Pharisees. Despite what  
you probably have heard, they are, in fact, the good guys. Usually we read Pharisees and  
something in our brain stem goes “Boooo!,” but you will have to trust me. They would have won  
the popular vote in their day. The Sadducees won the actual vote, because there was no vote. The  
  
139 

  
  
Sadducees were the elite in charge of the temple and they—like the Rockefellers or Bezos—do  
not have a good understanding of how the masses live. I know you are now thinking, “Why does  
Jesus spar with the Pharisees so much then?” The answer comes down to how to worship  
Yahweh and follow the Scriptures. Their problem is not because they are the bad guys. Their  
problem was that God is standing before them as the person of Jesus, and they reject him. John  
records in chapter 5 that  Jesus asks the Pharisees about how they will see the truth, because  
they are busy chasing after a glory that does not come from God. In other words, Jesus asks them  
how can you possibly see the glory of God, because you are blinded by the lesser glory of the  
admiration of others? Never mind the irony that the glory of God stands before them in that very  
moment. Ask yourself, “What is Jesus doing with that question?” This question challenges the  
listener. While the Pharisees might bristle at first, the question gives them an opportunity to  
consider if, in fac,t they might care a little too much about the approval of the crowds.   
Now if we fast forward to John 21, we get a glimpse into one of the most precious  
moments in the Scriptures. Peter denies Jesus thric,e and three times Peter is asked by Jesus,   
“Do you love me?” Imagine yourself on the shoreline as this moment unfolds. I like to imagine  
that Peter starts with his eyes down and averting Jesus’s when the Lord asks him the first time.  
But by the end he looks into Jesus’s face and says, “You know that I love you.”   
Again, I ask you, “What is Jesus doing by asking this question?” This is not just a  
question of factual “Hey, do you love me bro?” It is an invitation; it is a moment for  
vulnerability; it's a moment of restoration.  
Jesus asks more than three hundred questions, and I would encourage you to go look at a  
few of them and ask yourself, “What is Jesus accomplishing with this question?” Rarely does  
Jesus ask a matter-of-fact question. He does something more with them. Which brings me to the  


  
  
ultimate guiding question of my thesis: Should we, the church, be asking more and better  
questions?   
After the very brief lecture (fewer than thirty minutes), I transitioned to explain the  
design of the project and expectations for the participants. The guidelines and suggestions were  
simple and designed to increase the potential success of the project. See Appendix A for the  
handout the participants received.   
The first guideline asked that the individual choose a partner who “you experience joy in  
their presence and who you love (are attached to).” 140  In their book  The Other Half of Church ,  
the authors—one a literal brain scientist and the other a discipleship pastor—discuss the  
necessary components for spiritual growth. The book details how joy and attachment must be  
present for a person to change. 141  I defined joy as someone who delights in seeing you, and you  
delight in seeing them. Think of the person that you think brings you joy. Does their face and  
your face light up at seeing each other? If so, you have joy. As for love or attachment, I explained  
that they should choose a partner that they would not fear losing based on any answer they might  
give. Attachment means you trust that the bond of the relationship is secure, and conflict is  
something that you work through—not something that ends this relationship. If the person they  
wanted met both criteria, then they could choose them. While later this stipulation might be  
unnecessary, I wanted to stack the deck. I desired to give participants the best chance at honestly  
answering their questions, which might lead to positive identity formation. Naturally, I wanted to  
have a brain scientist in my corner.   
  
140 141 

  
  
After selecting their partner, the participants were given forty-five questions that fall  
under one of three categories. Yes, you guessed it: 1) Who Is God? 2) Who Am I? and 3) Who  
Are Others? See Appendix B for the list of questions. When writing them, I constructed open- 
ended questions, tried to invite imagination into the process, and recycled questions that have  
been helpful to me over the years in pastoral ministry. Some questions depended on vocabulary  
familiar to regular attenders of St Jude, and most assumed the person had a self-professed  
relationship with the triune God. In other words, these forty-five questions were written for St  
Jude, not a broad audience.   
 After receiving the questions, participants were instructed to ask each other all the  
questions and listen intently to the answers. While the partners were allowed to ask follow-up  
questions to the responses, I asked that they refrain from rebuking, correcting, or attempting to  
teach in response to an answer. This guideline accomplished two things. First, if after answering  
a question very vulnerably a person receives rebuke, this could teach her it is not safe to be  
honest and will prevent her from answering honestly in the future. Secondly, this will then skew  
the results of the experiment’s impact. If we are measuring the impact of asking and answering  
questions, then we must prevent any teaching from happening so that we measure only one  
variable at a time. I put it succinctly, that “the goal is to ask and answer the questions honestly,  
not  to change their mind.”  
After the two big stipulations—a trusted partner and no rogue teaching—I made  
suggestions for how I thought the process might best be done. I offered that asking a few  
questions a day for those who live together could be a good rhythm. Or, for those who do not live  
together to plan out several times to gather and go through chunks of questions that they decided  
to cover in advance. They were encouraged to consider if their partner was the type of person  


  
  
who needed longer to think before answering and, if so, planning ahead. They were told they  
could ask questions in any order and from any category as long as they asked and answered all of  
them.   
I then asked participants to take moments throughout the process to check in on how they  
felt during the exercises and to take note of any questions that surprised, discouraged, or  
encouraged them. Finally, they were told to feel free to chase any curiosities that came up  
because of this process. While they were prohibited from giving a book to their partner to read in  
response to their answers, they could certainly assign themselves a book if something inside of  
themselves triggered a desire to learn, change, or comfort. The participants were given sixty days  
to answer the forty-five questions. Then we reconvened at the church office to discuss the results.   
  
Measuring Tools  
  
When the class gathered for the first time, before the instruction began every participant  
was given a survey to address how they felt about their relationship to God, herself, and  
others/neighbors. Using a seven-point Likert scale (Strongly disagree to Strongly Agree), each  
person assessed how they felt about twelve statements. See Appendix C for the initial survey.   
  
During the interim between the initial class time during which they received brief  
instruction and the guidelines and the reconvening to discuss results, I sent only one piece of  
communication to participants—two email reminders informing them we would gather again and  
instructing them to mark their calendars. I hoped these communications would ensure people  
remembered to do the assignment.   
  
After the sixty days, the participants who returned for the second gathering completed the  
same survey in Appendix C in addition to six open-ended questions. They were not allowed to  


  
  
see their previous surveys, so they were answering the new one blind. The open-ended questions  
were as follows:    
•   How was this experience for you?  
•   Did anything surprise you?  
•   Are there areas of growth you plan to pursue?  
•   What, if any, impact did this exercise have upon you?  
•   Would you recommend this process to someone else? Why or why not?  
•   What changes would you make?   
After the participants filled out their surveys and responded to these questions, I gathered  
everyone into a circle to ask them to discuss the impact this exercise had on them. Several folks  
were unable to attend this second session, so I repeated this process with a group of four women  
at a coffee shop to make sure I was able to get their feedback as well. A total of twenty people  
filled out the initial survey and fourteen of those people filled out the final survey and  
participated in giving feedback.   
  
I asked the following questions of both groups:  
•   How did you complete the project? Did you answer all at once, space them out, forget  
and then cram them in the end?  
•   What would you change to this process?   
•   What would you cut from this process?  
•   What did you like from this process and would keep?  
•   Would you recommend this to others?  
•   Any other feedback for me or suggestions?   


  
  
  
Results:  
Compliance:  
  
All but one person completed the assignment using the guidelines I provided. While some  
answered the questions in large chunks, others spaced them out throughout the sixty days, and  
two brave souls answered all forty-five on a long road trip over Thanksgiving. The only person  
who did not select a partner and instead answered the questions by himself had the least change  
in his survey. With greater compliance came greater positive change in identity formation.  
  
Likert Data:  
  
On average, in seven of the twelve statements on the Likert scale, compliant participants  
improved their agreement by a point. Those statements include:  
•   I feel close to God.  
•   I feel that God loves me.  
•   I feel that God likes me.  
•   I like myself and enjoy time by myself.  
•   I love my neighbors well.  
•   I treat others the way they should be treated.  
•   I love God and my neighbor.   
This shows that after sixty days between the surveys, with only the forty-five questions and no  
other formal theological training, participants who followed the guidelines for this experiment  
showed positive identity formation in how God views them, how they feel about themselves, and  
how they treat their neighbor. I want to really drive home this point. A person came to this  


  
  
project in October. They might ranked themselves as a 2—agree that they feel like God loves  
them. Then, after answering forty-five questions—only fifteen of which pertain to God—they  
returned and said they were 1—strongly agree. Every single compliant participant improved by a  
whole point on this. Asking and answering questions helped the participants feel more loved by  
God. Questions impact.   
  
Interestingly, the statements that received little change had to do with statements  
pertaining to the understanding of self and purpose. Participants on average showed no change in  
agreement on the following statements:  
•   I am confident in my spiritual gifts and how to use them.  
•   I know who I am, like who I am, and am who I am.  
•   I believe God has a purpose for my life. 142   
None of the participants, except for the non-compliant one, experienced less agreement on these  
statements. Either they remained the same or improved in their agreement on all twelve  
statements. 143  Every single person had an overall net positive improvement in their identity  
formation except for the non-compliant individual. This means every person could say that  
asking and answering questions in community impacted their relationship with God, themself,  
and others in a net positive way.   
  
  
  
142      
143 

  
  
Open-ended Data:  
  
Below is a smattering of quotes from the open-ended section of the follow-up survey. I  
limited my selection below to those answers that demonstrate how this process impacted the  
person, positively or negatively.  
•   How was this experience for you?  
o   Stressful.  
o   We had lots of moments where we got to share laughter and tears in almost the  
same breath.   
o   I found myself thinking about God, myself, and my relationship with God and  
others in a deeper, more exciting way.  
o   In some ways very affirming and in other ways very convicting.  
o   I was struck by God’s personalized and intimate love for us.   
•   Did anything surprise you?  
o   I was surprised by how much I realized God helped me and my conversation  
partner to overcome in life.   
o   I was surprised by which questions ended up being harder to answer.   
o   How little I had before this thought about big issues in life.   
o   How many times I was brought to tears by these questions.    
o   How many times I had forgotten or had not realized how much God had worked  
in my life.   
o   How many times questions led to more questions.    
•   Are there areas of growth you plan to pursue?  
o   I’m going to study the attributes of God and people in the Bible more deeply.   


  
  
o   How to love others better.    
o   Grow in my compassion for those dissimilar to me.    
o   Love my neighbor better…it’s easier to not see them and not feel guilty.   
o   I want to go deeper with people.   
•   What, if any, impact did this exercise have upon you?  
o   I marveled at what God has done in my life.   
o   Made me realize how much God has changed me since my childhood.    
o   Convicting when it forced me to look deeper inside.    
o   Comforting.   
o   Felt closer to my wife.   
o   I feel more aware of the ways God has knit me together and how they reflect him.    
o   I’m more proud of myself.   
o   Reminded me of who I am before God.    
o   I felt so seen and loved which impacted my day, my inner dialogue, and my  
prayer life in a recognizable way.    
•   Would you recommend this process to someone else? Why or why not? 144   
o   Yes, it brings structure to discussing life, values, faith, and relationships in a safe  
way.    
o   Yes, but only if the person emphasizes that they are safe. The guidelines matter.   
o   Yes! This process has given me more insight and language in how I love, who I  
love, and why I love.    
  
144 

  
  
o   Yes, I think it is important for everyone who claims to be a Christian to at least  
think about who God is, who they are, and who their neighbor is.    
•   What changes would you make? 145    
o   Really emphasize the part about doing it with someone you love and trust.    
o   Offer additional resources or recommended resources for a follow-up with a for  
deeper study section. In other words, if I realize I do not know much about God  
the Father, what can I do in response to that?    
  
So What?   
  
Asking questions shapes a person. Asking good questions changes lives. Jesus showed us  
this two thousand years ago, and for those willing to ask and answer vulnerable questions, they  
may just find the way, the truth, and the life.   
Every person who participated in this project and followed the instructions experienced  
an improvement in the way they believed God felt about themselves and their neighbor. While  
most people improved upon their understanding of themselves, more work needs to be done to  
improve the questions for greater formation on self-identity. Yet, if pastors recreated this  
experiment in their churches, they should not be surprised if people feel as if they love God a  
little more, believe God loves them a little more, like themselves a little more, know themselves  
a little better, and care for their neighbors a little better.   
  
After the follow-up conversations with participants a few themes emerged that will  
impact how I teach or write about this project in the future. For starters, this worked. Questions  
  
145 

  
  
form our identities. While the forty-five questions need to be tweaked for a more general  
application—less St Jude-centric and less redundancy—they can be turned into a helpful tool for  
discipleship. Secondly, many participants want a follow-up to these questions. While this  
experiment limited the measurement to the impact on questions only, the natural follow-up  
would be to recreate this experiment with questions and resources for deeper study pertaining to  
theology.   
Some wanted a journal to process the questions before discussing with their partners.  
This feedback led to many different applications of this product such as a journal, deck of cards,  
study guide, or resource to track responses over time. When I asked if participants would  
recommend the project to others, all enthusiastically said yes, but several people made a strong  
caveat. They stressed the need to answer the questions with a person one deeply trusts. The  
guideline that included joy and attachment was paramount for them.   
While I believe the most effective use of the questions would be done in a safer context,  
some participants were just getting to know each other and found the exercise fruitful. Instead of  
limiting to such intimate conversation partners, I would simply encourage future participants to  
understand the benefit of a safe partner while also highlighting the potential for change in other  
relational contexts.   
Furthermore, not every relationship can or should be unfiltered in responses. For  
example, if a parent chose to do this experiment with a child, while the child might share her  
deepest darkest fears, insecurities, hopes, and dreams, it would be inappropriate for a mother to  
do the same. So, while the questions can and should encourage deep, vulnerable sharing, they  
can also be a tool that invites honest, meaningful conversation without exposing our most tender  
parts. Wisdom and context will determine the depth of the responses.   


  
  
Finally, if other ministers wished to replicate this project, a final “now what?”  
conversation with the participants would prove fruitful and wise. The questions created a desire  
for deeper study and more growth. Having a trained minister or disciple maker come alongside  
the participants and steward those desires toward helpful books, studies, sermons, spiritual  
disciplines, worship practices, or therapy would produce better formational fruit.   
Questions are a tool for exploration, formation, and discipleship. But, they are only one  
tool in a vast toolbox. Using these questions in conjunction with others would be the wisest  
course of action. 146  Questions shape people. Christians should ask more genuine questions.   
  
  
  
146 

  
  
CHAPTER 6  
THEOLOGICAL CONCLUSIONS  
SO WHAT?  
  
  
A Love for Millennials—Who am I?  
  
I have a confession to make: I care little about rhetoric or ancient views of discipleship.  
Or, maybe I should say I care about them as much as I care about most of the things I studied in  
seminary—I love to learn, I love to grow. Studying rhetoric is fun like studying Pharisees or  
Strategic Field Theory. However, while I find these fascinating, I have much greater passion for  
studying hermeneutics, trinitarianism or LeBronics. Those are my true areas of interest. One  
might then ask, “Why did you write an entire thesis about it, then?”   
I needed a trojan horse to talk about Millennials.  Time Magazine  once called my  
generation the “Me, Me, Me” generation. 147  An  Atlantic  article quipped, “We already know  
Millennials are the worst. But what is a Millennial?” 148    
My mom chose to deliver me in January of 1985, and her labor apparently was a very  
selfish decision on my part. Afterall, Millennials are the most selfish and entitled generation  
America has ever seen. So, I did the most natural thing a Millennial could do, I studied myself.  
Well, more accurately, I studied my generation.   
When I first graduated with my master’s, I noticed how often Millennials were  
disparaged in conversations about workplace difficulties and in the pews. Pastors complained  
  
147 148 

  
  
that Millennials were too self-focused to be of any use in their congregations. Too much naval  
gazing and not enough nave praising.   
When one Millennial dared to speak up about his struggles in the church through a blog  
post, he asked the church to love his generation and see them. He was shown the backdoor. 149  I  
love me. And, I love my friends, so I set out to find ways to minister to Millennials on our own  
turf. This led me to the definition of discipleship I currently use: Discipleship is identity  
formation which asks and answers Who is God? Who am I? Who are others? and How do those  
relate? The true secret sauce to this definition is the second question: Who am I? This question  
opens a world of possibility to minister to the Me generation.   
I know my generation cares about ourselves because every couple of years I have to learn  
a new way of describing myself. When I was in college, Zuckerberg stole or invented Facebook.  
In the beginning only those with an .edu email address could register, and this allowed only my  
generation to start defining ourselves online. For the first time in history people had to ask,  
“Which photo should be my profile photo?” We had to answer questions about ourselves—our  
likes, relationship status, and faith tradition. We could “like” something others posted when prior  
to Facebook, we had to guess with microfacial features.   
After I graduated from college, BuzzFeed started putting out quizzes—"Which Friends  
character are you?” “Which Avenger are you?” “Which position in Quidditch would you play?”  
In seminary at Dallas Theological, I took a quiz titled “Which disciple are you?” I got Peter, so I  
retook the quiz until I got John and posted it to my Facebook page. After seminary, I had to  
figure out which four letters defined me . . . INTJ, ESFP, QRST, or whatever those Meyers- 
  
149 

  
  
Briggs letters were. I always thought that test was a little nutty and recently heard a sociologist  
describe the Meyers Briggs as asking people, “Do you prefer earrings or shoestrings?” 150  He said  
there is absolutely no social science data to back up that the Meyers-Briggs is a good indicator of  
behavior or personality.   
And yet, in the spring of 2025 a comedian at a stand-up show in Dallas used the Meyers- 
Briggs as part of her set. After the four letters came the singular number. If you would have  
asked me ten years ago, “What number are you?,” I would have said clearly I am number one, I  
am a Millennial.   
However, if you look at the Enneagram, I am the furthest thing from a one. Enneagram  
fervor seems to be settling, but now my niece lets me know when I do something that is “so  
Capricorn.” I could keep going . . . StrengthsFinder, the Big 5, DiSC, etc. Millennial culture  
infiltrated corporate practices, too. In 2019, personality testing was now “a $500 million  
industry, with growth rates estimated at 10 to 15 percent annually, and appeal to consulting firms,  
hedge funds and start-ups alike.” 151  The selfish generation got to the Fortune 500s. If you want to  
know who you are, there is a test for you, and probably a free one online. Millennials want to  
know themselves.  
But, do you want to know what I noticed over the years? Maybe Millennials stand at the  
headwaters of this desire to know ourselves, but every other generation seems to have jumped  
into the stream, too. Rather than meeting this historical moment and deep-seated desire to know  
oneself, pastors and church leaders far too often rebuke the quest as selfish and unbefitting for  
  
150 151 

  
  
Christians. I have heard Christian thought leaders rail against the Enneagram because of its  
murky origins but fail to ask why this tool has so enraptured so many people. Why? Why do we  
insist on shaming and rebuking when we could invite and ask questions? Rather than dismiss this  
seemingly innate desire to know oneself, pastors would do well to realize this question—"Who  
am I?”—might be the very question that leads a person to the face of God. Instead of redirecting  
the question, we should encourage people to look harder. If the Bible is right, Calvin is right, and  
I am right, then the knowledge of self will eventually lead people to looking into the face of a  
loving and saving God.   
If people want to ask and answer, “Who am I?” shouldn’t the church be the place most  
ready and willing to help with that pursuit? We believe people are the image of God. We believe  
people receive gifts from the Spirit meant to be used for the building up of the body. We believe  
people are part of a body that works together, and if any part suffers the whole body suffers.  
Would that information not be helpful and formative for any person searching for who they are?   
In my questions (see Appendix B) people have a chance to ask the abovementioned  
questions in ways that encourage deeper analysis than that provided in a BuzzFeed article.  
Participants must ask and answer, “What passages of Scripture help form your identity?” This  
question does not rebuke the Enneagram but forces the person to go deeper. If someone has been  
searching for knowledge of herself and she comes to realize she is an Enneagram 2, then  
passages on service and sacrifice will help her see how her life could be conformed to Christ’s  
image. The 2s also come to serve and not be served.   
Maybe an Enneagram 3 answers this question and she comes to realize she has been  
waiting her whole life to be told to let her light shine before others  so that  people may see her  
good deeds and glorify her God. Performance for proselytizing is a 3s dream. As people dive  


  
  
more deeply into their knowledge of self, the 2-ness and the 3-ness falls away and Christ  
remains. But, their 2-ness and 3-ness are like handmaidens leading them to the face of God. Just  
ask an Enneagram 8 how she feels about Jesus flipping tables. She sees justice, and herself.   
Participants in my project also ask and answer, “What unique qualities and traits did God  
give you that you are grateful for?” This question brings to the surface what all Millennials  
already know—we are special, each one of us. Look, before any Baby Boomers or Gen X roll  
their eyes and say this is typical Millennial hooey phooey born out of our coddled, entitled  
upbrings, I must ask, who gave us all the participation trophies? You created us, now you have to  
mentor us.   
The question about uniqueness, though, finds its answer not only in our lived experiences  
but in the Scriptures. God knit me, which means “he is the author of every detail of my being.” 152   
What makes me unique? Let me ask God. These questions both satisfy the longing to know  
ourselves and force us to contend with the truest thing about us—we are the image of God.   
As a Millennial, I had childhood relics that consisted of thick plastic cases for the Disney  
VHS tapes. I go to therapy like every other Millennial to work through the trauma of the Fox and  
Hound saying goodbye and Scar hurling his brother into the stampede. In the Lion King, Simba  
wrestles with his own identity throughout much of the movie. Who am I? Am I the runaway  
murderer my uncle suggested to me or am I the rightful King of Pride Rock who needs to come  
lead my people to freedom, like Moses? When Rafiki the wise primate tells Simba to look into  
the water, Simba takes a passing glance. Then Rafiki grabs the lion’s head and forces him to look  
again and commands, “Look harder.” The water transforms and Simba sees his father looking  
back at him.   
  
152 

  
  
When Lion King first hit theaters, evangelicals protested and boycotted it. They were  
worried the pagan themes would corrupt their children. Maybe someone should have grabbed  
their heads and told them to look harder. Even if they miss the clear gospel messages throughout  
the movie, Simba’s experience mirrors so many. We have past trauma, competing identities,  
broken relationships, and the search for our purpose in life. Rather than look away from  
ourselves, we should look even more deeply. We will see our father looking back at us, too.   
For the love of Millennials and for the love of humanity, please, allow people to ask,  
“Who am I?” This question plays an integral role in the discipleship process. If we stop rebuking  
this pursuit and instead see it as a holy pilgrimage, we might find Millennials and others more  
willing to stay in the pews. Who am I? The answer to that question is nothing short of the child  
of God, made in his image, endowed with dignity, worthy of honor, welcomed to the table, and,  
if willing, filled with God’s Spirit that empowers you to change the world. If the Enneagram, my  
set of questions, or a Brene Brown podcast brings you to this conclusion, praise be to God.   
  
A Love of Karens—Who Are Others?   
  
I know if I turn on the news, I will see some talking head trying to convince me that DEI  
initiatives are not in my best interest, Nazi-ism is a viable position for the AfD in Germany, and  
immigrants might steal my Social Security. These are the tamer things I might hear. If I open  
Facebook, I will inevitably see that many older saints have continued their practice since the  
2016 election of reposting lies and unchecked gobbledygook. If I open Instagram, some angry  
white pastor or Vice-President might try to convince me that empathy and compassion are tools  
of the woke agenda and Christians should not give into this leftish propaganda. Christian  


  
  
nationalism, pretending to be faithful, shoved its stars and stripes down the throats of too many  
Americans. The love of neighbor has become a shibboleth for partisan politics.   
If discipleship is about formation centered on the identity of God, oneself, and our  
neighbor, then the white, evangelical American church has utterly failed to disciple our own.  
Asking and answering, “Who is my neighbor and what do I owe them?” has not been ignored. It  
has had a chainsaw taken to it and now looks like the remainder of Saul’s mail-ordered oxen (1  
Sam 11:7).  How do we get back some of those saints who have no media literacy training and  
believe the lies of Q-anon and cable news channels? Confrontation does not seem to work—that  
is because we are fighting what we think is a fire with a hose, when in fact these saints are  
drowning in loneliness.   
  
The Covid pandemic drove people to the internet and television screens in a time of  
uncertainty and isolation. The rise of Christian nationalism corresponded with people needing to  
touch more grass and fewer keys. The deep loneliness experienced by them made them easy  
targets for conspiracy theories and group identity. 153  Do some of the more entrenched Christian  
nationalists spew hate, racism, misogyny, and xenophobia at others? Yes. Should they be  
rebuked? Most ardently. Do they spew hatred and nonsense to belong to a group because deep  
down inside what drives them is not hatred but fear and loneliness? So it seems.   
In an article that asked Trump supporters why they come to so many Trump rallies, they  
answered that it was not about the man or his politics, but about comradery and fellowship. 154   
  
153 154 

  
  
How many churches in America have “fellowship” in their name that rallygoers pass on their  
way to don the red hats? Can we get them back? I sure hope so. What if they could walk into  
their churches and be asked questions about themselves and enjoy fellowship and comradery  
while they did so?  
  
It is not just the older folks who suffer with immense loneliness. We are all suffering  
under an epidemic of loneliness which is driving people into depression, anxiety, and suicide. I  
have spent nearly two decades thinking about how to combat this phenomenon. Researchers are  
trying to sound the alarm. Harvard’s Graduate School of Education conducted a study on  
loneliness in the post-Covid 19 pandemic era. They found in that study, 61 percent of young  
people (18–25) and 51 percent of mothers with young children report miserable degrees of  
loneliness. 155  In this case, misery would quite literally love some company.   
Yet a pandemic of loneliness started before Covid, so any naïve thoughts that we might  
bounce back someday should be dismissed outright. In 2018, Cigna—a health insurance  
company—partnered in research with UCLA and discovered that 1 in 4 Americans “rarely or  
never feel as though there are people that really understand” them. 156  Perhaps most surprisingly,  
despite all the technological wizardry and opportunity available to them, Gen Z (born 1997– 
2012) reported the highest levels of loneliness compared to Millennials, Gen X, Boomers, and  
  
155 156 

  
  
even the Greatest Generation. 157  Insurance companies study loneliness because it impacts their  
bottom dollar. Loneliness is as detrimental to a person’s health as smoking cigarettes. Churches  
should study it, because we believe people are inherently precious. Cigna should not care more  
than pastors.   
My family felt the devastating effects of suicide a few years ago. Most books on grief say  
that when someone faces tragedy, often they begin the meaning-making process afterwards. How  
can I turn this tragedy into something productive? I am gutted at the thought of people feeling  
helpless and alone. For this reason, I started affinity clubs at our church a couple of years ago— 
clubs for people who quilt, play board games, read books, and like walks. Ten years ago, I would  
have said that was silly, that people can find friendships outside of church. The church’s time and  
resources are for theology and Bible study. Now, I would commend any effort a church makes to  
help people feel less alone. Bunco and Bible, both are necessary.    
Churches should be the place where the lonely find relationships. Covid makes for a nice  
boogey man, but the pandemic only intensified a trend already occurring. People do not feel  
connected at their churches, so they look elsewhere. What if people knew they could come to  
church and be given a partner and a set of questions to explore God, themselves, and their  
neighbor? What if part of identity formation is helping people to understand they need others,  
and others need them? What if they were forced, like the lawyer who asked Jesus about the  
greatest command, to wrestle with who their neighbor might actually be? What if someone asked  
them questions about themselves and really listened? What if they realized that what they have to  
say does matter, but not because it’s full of hate and loud and joining a chorus of other screechers  
but because out of the mouth flows the overflow of the heart. And what if by having to say this  
  


  
  
out loud to a person who is looking them in the eyes and seeing them as they are causes them to  
reconsider that what they are saying? What if this causes them to get off Facebook and start  
serving others, who they once despised? These are a lot of what ifs. Cynicism says such people  
might be hopelessly entrenched, but I am a Millennial. I might be hopelessly selfish, but I  
stubbornly think I can change the world. Why not try?   
Creating cultures in our churches where people are encouraged and welcomed to ask and  
answer questions both invites the lonely into relationship, and it invites those filled with hate to  
say it to my face. I have found that those who spew hate from a place of loneliness rather than  
vitriol lack the courage in face-to-face moments that their keyboard and screen afford them.  
Incarnational ministry provides a healthy antidote to the epidemic of loneliness. It might just be  
the one vaccine some people are willing to take.   
  
For the Love of My Babies—A Curiosity Culture  
The greatest gift God has given me besides eternal life is the privilege of being an aunt. I  
love my babies with every fiber of my being. There are not enough superlatives in the English  
language to describe my love and delight in Jayden, Nixon, and AJ. One of my favorite things  
about being their aunt is that they ask me a lot of questions. I mean, a lot. The other day my  
nephew asked me if I ever yelled at my roommates. I told him only when they deserve it.   
My nieces and nephew ask me about God and nature and travel and heaven and death and  
food and why I don’t have a husband.   
I see in them the best of humanity. And there are days when I weep over the world they  
will have to endure. I hate that I know what the world will do to their curiosity and innocence. As  
their aunt I try to reward their curiosity as often as possible. I take the 10pm FaceTimes to  


  
  
discuss poetry and say, “I don’t know” when they ask something beyond my reach. My deep  
desire for them is that they will encounter God as a loving deity who delights in them and that  
they will stay curious the rest of their lives. If I can reward their curiosity enough right now, then  
maybe the first time they are rebuked or rebuffed for their questions, they will think the other  
person is defective rather than something being wrong with themselves. Asking questions is  
normal and good; shutting them down is sus and skibidi Ohio. 158    
I am only one person, though. While I think my influence in their lives is outsized in a  
good way, they will have school teachers, Sunday School leaders, mentors, and coaches who also  
play a part in their formation. For the love of Jayden, Nixon, and AJ, please, with all the sincerity  
I can muster, create ministries where curiosity is rewarded. I want them to be uncomfortable  
when they read Deuteronomy 7 and the  herem  commands. I want them to ask, “Is this good?”  
when they encounter those passages. I want them to ask, “Who am I?” when they are planning  
college and careers. Rather than being rebuked for asking, I want them to be encouraged to look  
harder. And I want them to ask, “Who is my neighbor?” and be challenged to love those who  
look, sound, and act differently than them. I want this for them, and for every niece and nephew  
who has ever lived.   
I own two cats. Curiosity has never come close to killing them. All it has ever done is  
make them cuter and better material for Instagram. If Clive and Cate’s curiosity makes them  
cuter, how much more so humanity’s quest for answers? The discipleship tool in this project is  
meant to form people into greater lovers of God, themselves, and neighbor. If it does that, then I  
am fulfilling my calling as a scholar and teacher. If it goes one step further and helps create  
  
158 

  
  
cultures of curiosity, I am fulfilling my calling as an aunt. Jayden, Nixon, and AJ deserve nothing  
less, and neither do your babies.   
  
For the Love of God—Who is God?  
  
When I first started teaching my definition of discipleship as identity formation asking  
and answering, Who is God?, Who am I? Who are others?, and How do these relate? I would tell  
people I am convinced of this because the Bible tells me so. I believe it pleases God to engage in  
this process, because God seems to go to great lengths to tell us the answers to these questions. I  
would challenge a person to take three highlighters and mark the Bible each time God is  
communicating something about himself, ourselves, or how we are to treat others. You would be  
hard pressed to find a page without any color. Take Genesis 1 for instance. While the creation  
story at first glance seems to be answering the question, “How was it all made?” or if you are a  
fundamentalist, “In how many literal days was it made?,” at a second glance it answers a  
different set of questions. Instead, it answers “Who made it?” and “How did he make it?” and  
“What’s the relationship of the things he made?”   
Who is God? The creator and sustainer of life who makes things good. Then, before you  
leave the chapter, God tells readers that he made humanity in his image—male and female. Who  
am I? The image of God. And he tells us something about our nature—it is not good for us to be  
alone. Who are others? Necessary for my flourishing. Page 1 of the Bible substantiates my thesis,  
and there are a lot more pages to go. Flip to the Sermon on the Mount. Who is God? The one  
who hears our prayers and desires to bring his kingdom to earth as it is in heaven. Who am I?  
The salt of the earth and light of the world. Who are others? Those I am supposed to treat as I  
would treat myself.   


  
  
  
Perhaps God answers these questions in his Word because he set these questions in our  
hearts. Maybe our hearts desire to know a God beyond ourselves, and longs to plumb the depths  
within ourselves, and hopes to see in our neighbor a soul worth knowing and protecting because  
that is what it means to be the image of God. God answers these questions in his Word because  
he knows we will eventually ask. My roommates anticipate my questions before I ask them all  
the time. As a creature of habit, I make it easy for them. Their ability to say “yes, in the fridge”  
before I ask about the pickled jalapenos on hamburger night shows they not only know me but  
also love me.   
God does a little better with bigger questions. If the whole of Scripture and life boils  
down to love God and love others, perhaps one way to show God and others that we love them is  
to stay curious about them. We can demonstrate our love for God and others by asking and  
answering questions with and about them. For the love of God, ask more questions.   
  
  
  
  


  
  
Appendix A  
Guidelines for Project  
10/2/24  
Dear Ones,  
  
Thank you for being a part of this experience. I am really hopeful it will be a helpful and  
revealing time for each of you. Below are the guidelines and suggestions for making the most of  
this time. Please do not hesitate to reach out if you have any questions: ###-###-####. 159   
  
Guidelines and Suggestions:  
1.   Choose a partner who you experience joy in their presence and who you love (are  
attached to).   
2.   Fill out the questionnaire to show how you’re doing. I am looking for changes, so please  
do not feel like there are “right” answers to any of these questions. This is a time for you  
to be honest with yourself.   
3.   Ask each other all of the questions. Listen intently to the answer, and feel free to ask  
follow-up or clarifying questions. BUT, do NOT rebuke, correct, or attempt to teach a  
different response.   
4.   The goal is to ask and answer the questions honestly, NOT to change their mind.   
5.   Asking 1 to 2 questions a day would be a good rhythm or putting aside time each week to  
ask several at once. But, you want room and space to be able to think and respond  
honestly. So, be intentional about when and how often you ask the questions.   
  
159 

  
  
6.   Take note of how you feel during this process or maybe an answer or two that surprised  
you, discouraged you, or encouraged you.   
7.   Feel free to ask questions from any category and in any order. Just make sure you get  
through them all.   
8.   You might consider 15 different sessions and you ask one question from each category at  
this time.  
9.   When you finish, come back and fill out the same survey and some additional questions.   
10.   Give me any feedback you have on the process.  
11.   Chase any curiosities that come up as a result of this process.   
  
We will gather again on Dec 4th at 7pm at the offices. If you cannot make it, please email  
me so I can send you the final survey and get your feedback.   
  
  


  
  
Appendix B:  
Discipleship Questions  
Nika’s DMin Thesis  
  
Who is God?  
  
1)   
What comes to mind when you hear God the Father? How does it make you feel?  
2)   
What comes to mind when you hear God the Son? How does it make you feel?  
3)   
What comes to mind when you hear God the Spirit? How does it make you feel?  
4)   
How would you describe God to a fellow Christian? What about a non-Christian?  
5)   
What passages about or attributes of God comfort you? Why?  
6)   
What passages about God make you uncomfortable? Why?  
7)   
God tells us he is merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love. Is  
this how you experience God?  
8)   
What does it reveal about God that he is triune–3 persons, 1 essence? What, if anything,  
does this mean to you?   
9)   
The Bible tells us “God is love,” what does this mean to you? How do you experience  
God’s love?  
10)   
Have you ever had an experience in life where you felt God’s nearness? Describe this  
experience.  
11)   
Have there been seasons when God feels far? What was that like?   
12)   
When you think of God, what images come to mind? Why?  
13)   
What do you sometimes wonder about concerning God?   
14)   
If you could ask God anything, what would you ask the triune?  
15)   
What do you wish was different about your relationship with God? What do you enjoy  
about your relationship with God?  
  
Who am I?  
1)   
What do you think God thinks about you? How does he feel toward you?  
2)   
When is it most challenging for you to approach God?  
3)   
What passages of Scripture help form your identity?   


  
  
4)   
What spiritual gifts has God given you? How do you think God intends for you to use  
them?  
5)   
What rhythms in your life are forming you into greater conformity to Christ?  
6)   
What rhythms are malforming you away from God’s best for you?  
7)   
When you pray, what are you imagining God is doing? How do you think he feels about  
you?  
8)   
What unique qualities and traits did God give you that you are grateful for?  
9)   
What parts of your past do you struggle to believe God has truly forgiven you? What  
might God say to you if you were to talk about it face to face?  
10)   
You are made in the image of God. What does this mean to you?  
11)   
How have you seen yourself change into greater Christlikeness? In what areas would you  
like to see more growth?  
12)   
God wants to be with you forever, how does that make you feel?  
13)   
What people have helped shape you positively? What did they do or say that had the  
biggest impact?   
14)   
What person from the Scriptures do you most admire? Why? How might they be an  
example to you?  
15)   
If you believed what God thought about you, how would your life change?   
  
Who are others?  
1)   
When you hear the word “neighbor” what comes to mind?  
2)   
Are there people or groups of people difficult for you to love? Why?  
3)   
When is it hard for you to forgive others?   
4)   
How might God have uniquely gifted you to love and serve others well?  
5)   
Describe a time when someone wept with you and a time when someone rejoiced with  
you.  
6)   
Describe a time when you wept with someone and rejoiced for them.  
7)   
When is it hardest to celebrate good in another person’s life?  
8)   
Is there someone God is calling you to love better and you are avoiding it? What is one  
step you can take to move in that direction?  


  
  
9)   
How would you want others to describe you? In what ways are those descriptions true  
and in what ways do you need to grow?  
10)   
Who are the people in your life you would like to love really well? What’s one rhythm  
that you can implement to help with that?  
11)   
Everyone is made in the image of God. What does this mean to you?  
12)   
God especially cares for the vulnerable. How do you do this also?  
13)   
If the whole of Scripture boils down to love of God and love of neighbor, why is this so  
hard for us at times?  
14)   
What kind of friend do you want to be for others? How could you be more like that?  
15)   
How does God feel about your enemy? How might you find a way to love them?   
  
  


  
  
Appendix C:  
Initial Survey for Participants  
Name:   
  
  
  
  
  Asking Better Questions  
  
Strongly Disagree     Disagree         Somewhat Disagree       Neutral    Somewhat Agree       Agree      Strongly Agree        
        (7).                (6)                     (5)                  (4)             (3)                 (2)              (1)  
  
  
1.   
I feel close to God.                                  (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
2.   
I feel that God loves me.                         (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
3.   
I feel that God likes me.                          (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
4.   
I trust God.                                               (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
5.   
I love God.                                               (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
6.   
I like myself and enjoy time by myself.  (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
7.   
I am confident in my spiritual gifts and how to use them.                      
                                                                            (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
8.   
I know who I am, like who I am, and am who I am.                                
                                                                             (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
9.   
I believe God has a purpose for my life.  
     (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
10.   
I love my neighbors well.                        (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
11.   
I treat others the way they should be treated.                                          
                                                                             (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
12.   
I love God and my neighbor.                   (7)       (6)         (5)         (4)         (3)      (2)       (1)   
  
  


  
  
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
  
Alter, Robert.  The Art of Biblical Narrative . New and Revised. New York: Basic Books, 2011.  
Andersen, Francis I.  Job . Tyndale Old Testament Commentaries 14. Lisle: InterVarsity, 2010.  
Arthur, Lindsay D.  The Meaning of “Make Disciples” in the Broader Context of the Gospel of  
Matthew . Eugene: Wipf & Stock, 2022.  
Bailey, Amy Kate, and Karen A. Snedker. “Practicing What They Preach? Lynching and Religion  
in the American South, 1890–1929.”  American Journal of Sociology  117, no. 3  
(November 2011): 844–87. https://doi.org/10.1086/661985.  
Balz, Horst Robert, and Gerhard Schneider, eds.  Exegetical Dictionary of the New Testament .  
Vol. 2. Grand Rapids: Wm B. Eerdmans, 1991.  
Bauer, David R. “The Theme of Mission in Matthew’s Gospel from the Perspective of the Great  
Commission.”  The Asbury Journal  74, no. 2 (2019): 240–76.  
Belnap, Nuel. “Declaratives Are Not Enough.”  Philosophical Studies  59, no. 1 (1990): 1–30.  
Berger, Warren.  A More Beautiful Question: The Power of Inquiry to Spark Breakthrough Ideas .  
New York: Bloomsbury, 2014.  
Best, Ernest.  Following Jesus: Discipleship in the Gospel of Mark . Journal for the Study of the  
New Testament Supplement Series 4. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1981.  
Blomberg, Craig L.  Jesus and the Gospels: An Introduction and Survey . Nashville: Broadman &  
Holman, 1997.  
———.  Matthew . The New American Commentary 22. Nashville: Broadman, 1992.  
Bock, Darrell L.  Jesus According to Scripture: Restoring the Portrait from the Gospels . Grand  
Rapid: Baker Academic, 2017.  
———.  Luke 1:1–9:50 . Vol. 1. Baker Exegetical Commentary of the New Testament 3A. Grand  
Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008.  
Bock, Darrell L., Nika Spaulding, Kat Armstrong, and Sam Eaton. “Millennials Leaving the  
Church.” Podcast audio, October 1, 2019.  
https://hendrickscenter.dts.edu/podcast/Millennials-leaving-church-classic/.  
Bordeyne, Philippe, and Bruce T. Morrill. “Baptism and Identity Formation: Convergences in  
Ritual and Ethical Perspectives A Dialogue.”  Societas Liturgica  42 (2012): 154–75.  
Brooks, David.  How to Know a Person: The Art of Seeing Others Deeply and Being Deeply  
Seen . New York: Random House, 2023.  


  
  
Brown, Jeannine K.  The Disciples in Narrative Perspective: The Portrayal and Function of the  
Matthean Disciples . Academia Biblica, no. 9. Leiden: Brill, 2002.  
Brown, Jeannine K., and Kyle A. Roberts.  Matthew . The Two Horizons New Testament  
Commentary. Chicago: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2018.  
Brueggemann, Walter A. “Jeremiah’s Use of Rhetorical Questions.”  Journal of Biblical  
Literature  92, no. 3 (1973): 358–74.  
Buckley, Michael J.  What Do You Seek? The Questions of Jesus as Challenge and Promise .  
Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co, 2016.  
Bump, Philip. “Here Is When Each Generation Begins and Ends, According to Facts.”  The  
Atlantic  (blog), March 25, 2014.  
https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/03/here-is-when-each-generation- 
begins-and-ends-according-to-facts/359589/.  
Calvin, Jean, and Jean.  Institutes of the Christian Religion . Edited by John Thomas McNeill. The  
Library of Christian Classics. Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2006.  
Canavan, Hillary. “Athens, GA Restaurant Behind R.E.M.’s ‘Automatic for the People’ to Close -  
Eater.” Accessed January 25, 2025. https://www.eater.com/2013/11/5/6336657/athens-ga- 
restaurant-behind-r-e-m-s-automatic-for-the-people-to-close.  
Chen, Diane G.  Luke: A New Covenant Commentary . New Covenant Commentary Series, Luke.  
Eugene: Cascade, 2017.  
Cigna. “Cigna U.S. Loneliness Index.” Infographic, 2018. https://www.cigna.com/static/www- 
cigna-com/docs/about-us/newsroom/studies-and-reports/combatting- 
loneliness/loneliness-survey-2018-infographic.pdf.  
Clear, James.  Atomic Habits: Tiny Changes, Remarkable Results . New York: Avery, 2018.  
Conn, Harvie M.  Evangelism: Doing Justice and Preaching Grace . Philipsburg: P & R  
Publishing, 1992.  
Copenhaver, Martin B.  Jesus Is the Question: The 307 Questions Jesus Asked and the 3 He  
Answered . Nashville: Abingdon, 2014.  
Cortez, Marc.  Resourcing Theological Anthropology: A Constructive Account of Humanity in the  
Light of Christ . Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2017.  
Cotter, David W.  Genesis . Berit Olam: Studies in Hebrew Narrative and Poetry. Collegeville:  
Liturgical, 2003.  
Dear, John.  The Questions of Jesus: Challenging Ourselves to Discover Life’s Great Answers .  
New York: Image Books, 2004.  


  
  
Demosthenes.  Orations, Volume IV: Orations 27–40 . Translated by A.T. Murray. Vol. 4. 7 vols.  
Loeb Classical Library 318. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, n.d.  
Dias, Elizabeth, ed.  What Did Jesus Ask? Christian Leaders Reflect on His Questions of Faith .  
New York: Time Books, 2015.  
Dio Chrysostom, and Henry Lamar Crosby.  Dio Chrysostom . Vol. 4. 5 vols. Loeb Classical  
Library 257, 339, 358, 376, 385. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971.  
Donaldson, Terence L. “Guiding Readers—Making Disciples: Discipleship in Matthew’s  
Narrative Strategy.” In  Patterns of Discipleship in the New Testament , 30–49. Grand  
Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1996.  
Dunn, James D. G. “Did Jesus Attend the Synagogue?” In  Jesus and Archaeology , edited by  
James H Charlesworth, 206–22. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006.  
Eby, Dave. “Make Disciples.” Ligonier Ministries. Accessed January 26, 2025.  
https://learn.ligonier.org/articles/make-disciples.  
Estes, Douglas.  The Questions of Jesus in John: Logic, Rhetoric and Persuasive Discourse .  
Biblical Interpretation Series, vol. 115. Leiden: Brill, 2013.  
Etheredge, Craig. “How Can You Effectively Make Disciples,” June 4, 2024.  
https://disciplefirst.com/how-can-you-effectively-make-disciples/.  
Frame, John M.  A History of Western Philosophy and Theology . Phillipsburg: P & R, 2015.  
France, R. T.  The Gospel of Matthew . The New International Commentary on the New  
Testament. Grand Rapids: Wm B. Eerdmans, 2007.  
Fukuyama, Francis.  Identity: Contemporary Identity Politics and the Struggle for Recognition .  
London: Profile Books, 2018.  
Gallares, Judette A.  Images of Faith: Spirituality of Women in the Old Testament . Maryknoll:  
Orbis Books, 1994.  
  
Gitay, Yehoshua. “Biblical Rhetoric: The Art of Religious Dialogue.”  Journal for Semitics  18  
(2008): 34–56.  
Goldberg, Emma. “Personality Tests Are the Astrology of the Office.”  The New York Times ,  
September 17, 2019, sec. Style. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/17/style/personality- 
tests-office.html.  
Green, Joel B., ed.  Dictionary of Jesus and the Gospels: A Compendium of Contemporary  
Biblical Scholarship . 2 ed. The IVP Bible Dictionary Series. Downers Grove: IVP, 2013.  
Harris, William V.  Ancient Literacy . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.  


  
  
Heijne, Camilla Hélena von. “The Messenger of the Lord in Early Jewish Interpretations of  
Genesis.” Beihefte Zur Zeitschrift Für Die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft, Band 412. De  
Gruyter, 2010.  
Helyer, Larry R.  The Life and Witness of Peter . Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2012.  
Hendricks, Michel, and Jim Wilder.  The Other Half of Church: Christian Community, Brain  
Science, and Overcoming Spiritual Stagnation . Chicago: Moody, 2020.  
Hinckley, Story. “These Superfans Travel Miles to See Donald Trump—and Each Other.”  
Christian Science Monitor , November 8, 2019.  
https://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Politics/2019/1029/These-superfans-travel-miles-to- 
see-Donald-Trump-and-each-other.  
Hoffman, Kathryn Vitalis, and Mark Vitalis Hoffman. “Question Marks and Turning Points:  
Following the Gospel of Mark to Surprising Places.”  Word and World  26, no. 1 (2006):  
69–76.  
Hogg, Michael A., and Dominic Abrams.  Social Identifications: A Social Psychology of  
Intergroup Relations and Group Processes . London: Routledge, 1988.  
Hogg, Michael A., Deborah J. Terry, and Katherine M. White. “A Tale of Two Theories: A  
Critical Comparison of Identity Theory with Social Identity Theory.”  Social Psychology  
Quarterly  58, no. 4 (1995): 255–69. https://doi.org/10.2307/2787127.  
Imes, Carmen Joy.  Being God’s Image: Why Creation Still Matters . Melton: InterVarsity, 2023.  
Josephus, Flavius.  The Works of Josephus: Complete and Unabridged . Translated by William  
Whiston. New Updated. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2003.  
Keener, Craig S.  Acts: An Exegetical Commentary . Vol. 3. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic,  
2014.  
———.  The Gospel of John . Vol. 1. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2012.  
———.  The Gospel of Matthew: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary . Chicago: Wm. B. Eerdmans,  
2009.  
———, ed.  The IVP Bible Background Commentary: New Testament . Second Edition. Downers  
Grove: InterVarsity, 2014.  
Kennedy, George A.  Aristotle On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse . Oxford: Oxford  
University Press, 1991.  
Kidner, Derek.  Psalms 73–150 . Kidner Classic Commentaries. Downers Grove: InterVarsity,  
2014.  


  
  
Kittel, Gerhard, ed.  Theological Dictionary of the New Testament . Vol. 4. 10 vols. Grand Rapids:  
Wm B. Eerdmans, 1985.  
Lee, Boyung.  Transforming Congregations through Community: Faith Formation from the  
Seminary to the Church . Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2013.  
  
Levine, Amy-Jill, and Ben Witherington.  The Gospel of Luke . New Cambridge Bible  
Commentary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.  
Lewis, C. S.  The Chronicles of Narnia . New York: HarperCollins, 2004.  
Longenecker, Richard N.  Patterns of Discipleship in the New Testament . Chicago: Wm. B.  
Eerdmans, 1996.  
Maalouf, Tony. “Hagar: God Names Adam, Hagar Names God.” In  Vindicating the Vixens:  
Revisiting Sexualized, Vilified, and Marginalized Women of the Bible , edited by Sandra  
Glahn. Grand Rapids: Kregel Academic, 2017.  
Malherbe, Abraham J.  Moral Exhortation, A Greco-Roman Sourcebook . Edited by Wayne A.  
Meeks. Library of Early Christianity 4. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1989.  
Martin, James SJ. “Do You Believe That I Am Able to Do This?” In  What Did Jesus Ask?  
Christian Leaders Reflect on His Questions of Faith , edited by Elizabeth Dias, 17–21.  
New York: Time Inc., 2016.  
Mathis, David. “How Did Jesus ‘Make Disciples’?”  Desiring God  (blog), June 2, 2022.  
https://www.desiringgod.org/articles/how-did-jesus-make-disciples.  
McKnight, Scot.  Sermon on the Mount . Edited by Tremper Longman and Scot McKnight. The  
Story of God Bible Commentary. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2016.  
McKnight, Scot, and Thomas Preson Phillips.  Invisible Jesus: A Book about Leaving the Church  
and Looking for Christ . Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2024.  
“Millennials: The Me Me Me Generation,” May 20, 2013. https://time.com/247/Millennials-the- 
me-me-me-generation/.  
Mineo, Liz. “Good Genes Are Nice, But Joy Is Better.”  Harvard Gazette  (blog), April 11, 2017.  
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2017/04/over-nearly-80-years-harvard-study-has- 
been-showing-how-to-live-a-healthy-and-happy-life/.  
Morris, Leon.  The Gospel According to Matthew . Leicester: Inter-Varsity Press, 1995.  
Moshavi, Adina. “Between Dialectic and Rhetoric: Rhetorical Questions Expressing Premises in  
Biblical Prose Argumentation.”  Vestus Testamentum  61, no. 1 (2015): 136–51.  


  
  
Mosser, Carl. “Torah Instruction, Discussion, and Prophecy in First-Century Synagogue.” In  
From Christian Origins and Hellenistic Judaism , edited by Stanley E. Porter and Andrew  
W. Pitts, 2:523–51. Leiden: Brill, 2012.  
Neusner, Jacob.  Jerusalem and Athens: The Congruity of Talmudic and Classical Philosophy .  
Supplements to the Journal for the Study of Judaism, v. 52. Leiden: Brill, 1997.  
O’Neil, Michael D. “The Role of Baptism in Christian Identity Formation.”  Religions  15, no. 4  
(2024): 458–80.  
Parsons, Mikeal C., and Michael W. Martin.  Ancient Rhetoric and the New Testament: The  
Influence of Elementary Greek Composition . Waco: Baylor University Press, 2018.  
Perdue, Leo G. “Rhetoric and the Art of Persuasion in the Wisdom of Solomon.” In  Christian  
Origins and Hellenistic Judaism , edited by Stanley E. Porter and Andrew W. Pitts, 341– 
72. Leiden: Brill, 2012.  
Philo, and Charles Duke Yonge.  The Works of Philo: Complete and Unabridged . New Edition.  
Peabody: Hendrickson, 2002.  
Pitts, Andrew W., and Stanley E. Porter. “Paul and His Bible: His Education and Use of the  
Scriptures of Israel.”  Journal of Greco-Roman Christianity and Judaism  5 (2008): 9–41.  
Quarles, Charles L.  Matthew . Evangelical Biblical Theology Commentary. Bellingham: Lexham  
Academic, 2022.  
Robbins, Vernon K.  Exploring the Texture Texts: A Guide to Socio-Rhetorical Interpretation .  
Valley Forge: Trinity Press International, 1996.  
Roccas, Sonia, and Marilynn B. Brewer. “Social Identity Complexity.”  Personality and Social  
Psychology Review  6 (2002): 88–106.  
Rubenstein, Jeffrey L.  The Culture of the Babylonian Talmud . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins  
University Press, 2005.  
Scott, Gary Alan.  Philosophy in Dialogue: Plato’s Many Devices . Topics in Historical  
Philosophy. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2007.  
Segovia, Fernando F., ed.  Discipleship in the New Testament . Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985.  
Strauss, Mark L.  Mark . Zondervan Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament 2. Grand  
Rapids: Zondervan, 2014.  
Terenzi, Damiano, Anne-Katrin Muth, Annabel Losecaat Vermeer, and Soyoung Q. Park.  
“Psychotic-like Experiences in the Lonely Predict Conspiratorial Beliefs and Are  
Associated with the Diet during COVID-19.”  Frontiers in Nutrition  9 (October 28,  
2022): 1006043. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.1006043.  


  
  
Thompson, Marianne Meye.  John: A Commentary . Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press,  
2015.  
Viljoen, Francois P. “Righteousness and Identity Formation in the Sermon on the Mount.”  HTS  
Teologiese Studies  69, no. 1 (2013): 1–10.  
Wallace, Daniel B.  Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New  
Testament . Grand Rapid: Zondervan, 2001.  
Wanak, Lee. “Jesus’ Questions.”  ERT  33, no. 2 (2009): 167–78.  
Weissbourd, Richard, Milena Batanova, Virginia Lovison, and Eric Torres. “How the Pandemic  
Has Deepened an Epidemic of Loneliness and What We Can Do about It.”  Making  
Caring Common Project , n.d.  
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b7c56e255b02c683659fe43/t/6021776bdd04957c4 
557c212/1612805995893/Loneliness+in+America+2021_02_08_FINAL.pdf.  
Wenham, Gordon J.  Genesis 1–15 . Word Biblical Commentary 1. Dallas: Word Books, 1987.  
———.  Genesis 16–50 . Word Biblical Commentary 2. Dallas: Word Books, 1994.  
Wintle, Brian Charles, Havilah Dharamraj, Jesudason Basker Jeyaraj, Paul Swarup, Jacob  
Cherian, Finny Philip, and Ashish Chrispal, eds.  South Asia Bible Commentary: A One- 
Volume Commentary on the Whole Bible . Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2015.  
  
Witherington, Ben. “Graffiti at the SBL!”  Ben Witherington  (blog), December 16, 2008.  
http://benwitherington.blogspot.com/2008/12/graffiti-at-sbl.html.  
Witherington III, Ben.  New Testament Rhetoric: An Introductory Guide to the Art of Persuasion  
in and Of the New Testament . Eugene: Cascade, 2009.  
Wright, Brian J. “Ancient Literacy in New Testament Research: Incorporating A Few More Lines  
of Enquiry.”  Trinity Journal  36, no. 2 (2015): 161–89.  
———.  Communal Reading in the Time of Jesus: A Window into Early Christian Reading  
Practices . Minneapolis: Fortress, 2017.  
  


